
1. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2016 Mar 3. doi: 10.1002/prca.201500114. [Epub ahead of
print]

Aqueous Terminalia Arjuna Extract Modulates Expression of Key
Atherosclerosis-Related Proteins in a Hypercholesterolemic Rabbit: A Proteomic
Based Study.

Rather RA(1), Malik VS(1), Trikha D(1), Bhat O(1), Dhawan V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, PGIMER, Chandigarh,
India.

PURPOSE: The present study evaluates the effect of an aqueous extract of
Terminalia arjuna (aqTAE) on protein expression in aortic plaques of
hypercholesterolemic rabbits using a proteomic approach.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty male New Zealand rabbits (n = 6) were employed as Gp1
(stock diet); Gp2 (high fat diet); Gp3 (stock diet + aqTAE); Gp4 (high fat diet +
aqTAE) and Gp5 (high fat diet + atorvastatin) and followed for 6 months. Protein 
lysates of aortic tissues were separated by 2D-GE and proteins were identified by
MALDI-TOF/MS.
RESULTS: Serum lipids were found to be significantly increased by a high-fat diet
and reduced by aqTAE both at 3 and 6 months (Gp4 vs Gp2; p<0.05). Total 79 spots 
were differentially expressed, among which 60 individual proteins were
identified, 31 grouped as atherosclerosis-related proteins and 29 classified as
others. aqTAE significantly attenuated the protein expression of TNF-α, COX-2,
MMP-9, HSP60, ICAM-5, Endothelin-3, Vimentin, Protein S100-A9 besides others.
Many of the observed proteins are known to be consistently associated with
endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, plaque rupture and immune imbalance.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Strong hypolipidemic effects of aqTAE and
attenuation of these signature atherogenic biomarkers using proteomics highlights
the fact that aqTAE may be useful in the prevention and management of
atherosclerosis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26934842  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Blood. 2016 Feb 29. pii: blood-2016-01-631259. [Epub ahead of print]

Cholesterol in platelet biogenesis and activation.

Wang N(1), Tall AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, United States nw30@cumc.columbia.edu. (2)Division
of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY, United States.

Hypercholesterolemia is a well-established risk factor for atherothrombotic
disease, largely attributed to its impact on lesional cells in atherosclerotic
plaques such as macrophages and their critical roles in inflammation,
atherogenesis, plaque rupture and athero-thrombosis. Platelets are involved in
immune and inflammatory responses and directly impact atherogenesis, primarily by
modulating immune and inflammatory effector cells. There is emerging evidence
that hypercholesterolemia increases the risk of atherosclerosis and arterial
thrombosis by modulating platelet biogenesis and activity. This review highlights
recent findings on the impact of aberrant cholesterol metabolism on platelet
biogenesis and activity and their relevance in atherosclerosis and thrombosis.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26929273  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2016 Jan 22. pii: S1553-8389(16)30002-1. doi:
10.1016/j.carrev.2016.01.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Serum biomarkers and source of inflammation in acute coronary syndromes and
percutaneous coronary interventions.

Centurión OA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Investigation, Sanatorio Metropolitano, Fernando
de la Mora, Paraguay; Cardiology Division, First Department of Internal Medicine,
Clinical Hospital, Asunción National University, San Lorenzo, Paraguay.
Electronic address: osmarcenturion@hotmail.com.

There is robust information that confirms the enormous contribution of
inflammation to plaque development, progression and vulnerability. The presence
of plaques with inflammatory components associates with a greater likelihood of
future cardiovascular events. The inflammatory cascade has been implicated during
the entire plaque formation, from the early stages of endothelial dysfunction to 
the development of acute coronary syndromes (ACS). The presence of macrophages, T
lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and mast cells in atherosclerotic lesions; the
detection of HLA class II antigen expression; and the finding of secretion of
several cytokines point to the involvement of immune inflammatory mechanisms in
the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Serum biomarkers reflecting the activity of 
biological processes involved in plaque growth or destabilization may provide
great help in establishing the appropriate clinical management, and therapeutic
interventions. Evidence for a role of inflammation in plaque rupture has been
demonstrated by localization of inflammation at plaque rupture sites. However,
the focus of inflammation may not precisely reside within the coronary vessel
itself but rather in the injured myocardium distal to the disrupted plaque. These
observations outline the potential benefits of therapies targeting inflammation
in the arterial wall and cardiovascular system. Emerging anti-inflammatory
approaches to vascular protection have the potential to benefit patients by
marked reductions in serum biomarkers of inflammation and reduce vascular events.
With ongoing technical advances, percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) will
continue to play a critical role in the evaluation of novel compounds designed to
modulate inflammation. The constant refinements in the different therapeutic
strategies, the combination of scientific understanding in the adequate
utilization of novel inflammatory markers, the new pharmacologic agents, and the 
new techniques in PCI will ameliorate our therapeutic management in ACS based on 
medical evidence.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26905055  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Circ Res. 2016 Feb 19;118(4):692-702. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306361.

Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells in Atherosclerosis.

Bennett MR(1), Sinha S(2), Owens GK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Addenbrooke's Centre for
Clinical Investigation, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom
(M.R.B., S.S.); and University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville
(G.K.O.). mrb@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk. (2)From the Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Addenbrooke's Centre for Clinical Investigation, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom (M.R.B., S.S.); and University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville (G.K.O.).

The historical view of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in atherosclerosis is
that aberrant proliferation of VSMCs promotes plaque formation, but that VSMCs in
advanced plaques are entirely beneficial, for example preventing rupture of the
fibrous cap. However, this view has been based on ideas that there is a
homogenous population of VSMCs within the plaque, that can be identified separate
from other plaque cells (particularly macrophages) using standard VSMC and
macrophage immunohistochemical markers. More recent genetic lineage tracing
studies have shown that VSMC phenotypic switching results in less-differentiated 
forms that lack VSMC markers including macrophage-like cells, and this switching 
directly promotes atherosclerosis. In addition, VSMC proliferation may be
beneficial throughout atherogenesis, and not just in advanced lesions, whereas
VSMC apoptosis, cell senescence, and VSMC-derived macrophage-like cells may
promote inflammation. We review the effect of embryological origin on VSMC
behavior in atherosclerosis, the role, regulation and consequences of phenotypic 
switching, the evidence for different origins of VSMCs, and the role of
individual processes that VSMCs undergo in atherosclerosis in regard to plaque
formation and the structure of advanced lesions. We think there is now compelling
evidence that a full understanding of VSMC behavior in atherosclerosis is
critical to identify therapeutic targets to both prevent and treat
atherosclerosis.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4762053 [Available on 2016-08-19]
PMID: 26892967  [PubMed - in process]


5. The Role of Lipids and Lipoproteins in Atherosclerosis.

Linton MRF, Yancey PG, Davies SS, Vickers KC, Jerome WGJ, Linton EF.
In: De Groot LJ, Beck-Peccoz P, Chrousos G, Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman JM,
Koch C, McLachlan R, New M, Rebar R, Singer F, Vinik A, Weickert MO, editors.
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.
2015 Dec 24.

Atherosclerosis is the underlying cause of heart attack and stroke. Early
observations that cholesterol is a key component of arterial plaques gave rise to
the cholesterol hypothesis for the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Population
studies have demonstrated that elevated levels of LDL cholesterol and
apolipoprotein B (apoB) 100, the main structural protein of LDL, are directly
associated with risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular events (ASCVE). Indeed,
infiltration and retention of apoB containing lipoproteins in the artery wall is 
a critical initiating event that sparks an inflammatory response and promotes the
development of atherosclerosis. Arterial injury causes endothelial dysfunction
promoting modification of apoB containing lipoproteins and infiltration of
monocytes into the subendothelial space. Internalization of the apoB containing
lipoproteins by macrophages promotes foam cell formation, which is the hallmark
of the fatty streak phase of atherosclerosis. Macrophage inflammation results in 
enhanced oxidative stress and cytokine/chemokine secretion, causing more
LDL/remnant oxidation, endothelial cell activation, monocyte recruitment, and
foam cell formation. HDL, apoA-I, and endogenous apoE prevent inflammation and
oxidative stress and promote cholesterol efflux to reduce lesion formation.
Macrophage inflammatory chemoattractants stimulate infiltration and proliferation
of smooth muscle cells. Smooth muscle cells produce the extracellular matrix
providing a stable fibrous barrier between plaque prothrombotic factors and
platelets. Unresolved inflammation results in formation of vulnerable plaques
characterized by enhanced macrophage apoptosis and defective efferocytosis of
apoptotic cells resulting in necrotic cell death leading to increased smooth cell
death, decreased extracellular matrix production, and collagen degradation by
macrophage proteases. Rupture of the thinning fibrous cap promotes thrombus
formation resulting in clinical ischemic ASCVE. Surprisingly, native LDL is not
taken up by macrophages in vitro but has to be modified to promote foam cell
formation. Oxidative modification converts LDL into atherogenic particles that
initiate inflammatory responses. Uptake and accumulation of oxidatively modified 
LDL (oxLDL) by macrophages initiates a wide range of bioactivities that may drive
development of atherosclerotic lesions. Lowering LDL-cholesterol with statins
reduces risk for cardiovascular events, providing ultimate proof of the
cholesterol hypothesis. All of the apoB containing lipoproteins are atherogenic, 
and both triglyceride rich remnant lipoproteins and Lp(a) promote
atherothrombosis. Non-HDL cholesterol levels capture all of the apoB containing
lipoproteins in one number and are useful in assessing risk in the setting of
hypertriglyceridemia. Measures of apoB and LDL-P are superior at predicting risk 
for ASCVE, when levels of LDL-C and LDL-P are discordant. Here, we also describe 
the current landscape of HDL metabolism. Epidemiological studies have
consistently shown that HDL-C levels are inversely related to ASCVE. We highlight
recent clinical trials aimed at raising HDL-C that failed to reduce CVE and the
shifting clinical targets of HDL-C, HDL particle numbers, and HDL function (e.g. 
cholesterol efflux capacity). Furthermore, we describe many beneficial properties
of HDL that antagonize atherosclerosis and how HDL dysfunction may promote
cardiometabolic disease.

PMID: 26844337  [PubMed]


6. Vascul Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 27. pii: S1537-1891(16)00029-X. doi:
10.1016/j.vph.2016.01.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Cholesterol-independent effects of atorvastatin prevent cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality in a mouse model of atherosclerotic plaque rupture.

Roth L(1), Rombouts M(2), Schrijvers DM(2), Martinet W(2), De Meyer GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiopharmacology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
Electronic address: lynn.roth@uantwerpen.be. (2)Laboratory of Physiopharmacology,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Because cholesterol-independent effects of statins are difficult to determine in 
patients, we studied these pleiotropic effects in apolipoprotein E-deficient
(ApoE(-/-)) mice with a mutation in the fibrillin-1 gene (Fbn1(C1039G+/-)). These
mice develop exacerbated atherosclerosis and spontaneous plaque ruptures,
accompanied by myocardial infarctions (MI) and sudden death.
ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-) mice were fed a Western diet (WD). At week 10 of WD,
mice were divided in a control (WD), atorvastatin (10mg/kg/day + WD) and
cholesterol withdrawal group (cholW, normal chow). The latter was included to
compare the effects of atorvastatin with dietary lipid lowering. Fifteen weeks
later, the mice were sacrificed. CholW, but not atorvastatin, reduced plasma
cholesterol. Survival increased from 50% to 90% both in cholW and atorvastatin
treated mice. CholW as well as atorvastatin treatment increased plaque collagen
and fibrous cap thickness, but they did not affect the amount of plaque
macrophages and T cells. MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity was significantly lower and the
expression of MMP-12, TNF-α and IL-1β was strongly reduced in both treatment
groups. Blood monocytes and neutrophils returned to baseline levels (ApoE(-/-)
mice before the onset of atherosclerosis). Importantly, atorvastatin but not
cholW significantly reduced coronary stenosis (from 50 to 28%) and the occurrence
of MI (from 43 to 10%). In conclusion, independent of cholesterol lowering,
atorvastatin significantly reduced mortality, plaque vulnerability and
inflammation to the same extent as cholW. In addition, atorvastatin but not cholW
reduced coronary stenosis and the occurrence of MI. These data unequivocally
illustrate the significance of the pleiotropic effects of atorvastatin in the
prevention of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26826559  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Radiol Res Pract. 2015;2015:410967. doi: 10.1155/2015/410967. Epub 2015 Dec 20.

Imaging Modalities to Identity Inflammation in an Atherosclerotic Plaque.

Goel S(1), Miller A(1), Agarwal C(1), Zakin E(2), Acholonu M(1), Gidwani U(3),
Sharma A(4), Kulbak G(5), Shani J(5), Chen O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 11219, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA. (3)Department of Cardiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029, USA. (4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, State University
of New York Downstate Medical Centre, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA. (5)Department of
Cardiology, Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 11219, USA.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic, progressive, multifocal arterial wall disease
caused by local and systemic inflammation responsible for major cardiovascular
complications such as myocardial infarction and stroke. With the recent
understanding that vulnerable plaque erosion and rupture, with subsequent
thrombosis, rather than luminal stenosis, is the underlying cause of acute
ischemic events, there has been a shift of focus to understand the mechanisms
that make an atherosclerotic plaque unstable or vulnerable to rupture. The
presence of inflammation in the atherosclerotic plaque has been considered as one
of the initial events which convert a stable plaque into an unstable and
vulnerable plaque. This paper systemically reviews the noninvasive and invasive
imaging modalities that are currently available to detect this inflammatory
process, at least in the intermediate stages, and discusses the ongoing studies
that will help us to better understand and identify it at the molecular level.

PMCID: PMC4699110
PMID: 26798515  [PubMed]


8. Thromb Haemost. 2016 Feb 29;115(3):493-500. doi: 10.1160/TH15-09-0712. Epub 2016 
Jan 21.

MRI-based biomechanical parameters for carotid artery plaque vulnerability
assessment.

Speelman L(1), Teng Z, Nederveen AJ, van der Lugt A, Gillard JH.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Lambert Speelman, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ee 23.38B, P.O Box
2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Tel.: +31 10 70 44039, Fax: +31 10 70
44720, E-mail: L.speelman@erasmusmc.nl.

Carotid atherosclerotic plaques are a major cause of ischaemic stroke. The
biomechanical environment to which the arterial wall and plaque is subjected to
plays an important role in the initiation, progression and rupture of carotid
plaques. MRI is frequently used to characterize the morphology of a carotid
plaque, but new developments in MRI enable more functional assessment of carotid 
plaques. In this review, MRI based biomechanical parameters are evaluated on
their current status, clinical applicability, and future developments. Blood flow
related biomechanical parameters, including endothelial wall shear stress and
oscillatory shear index, have been shown to be related to plaque formation.
Deriving these parameters directly from MRI flow measurements is feasible and has
great potential for future carotid plaque development prediction. Blood pressure 
induced stresses in a plaque may exceed the tissue strength, potentially leading 
to plaque rupture. Multi-contrast MRI based stress calculations in combination
with tissue strength assessment based on MRI inflammation imaging may provide a
plaque stress-strength balance that can be used to assess the plaque rupture risk
potential. Direct plaque strain analysis based on dynamic MRI is already able to 
identify local plaque displacement during the cardiac cycle. However, clinical
evidence linking MRI strain to plaque vulnerability is still lacking. MRI based
biomechanical parameters may lead to improved assessment of carotid plaque
development and rupture risk. However, better MRI systems and faster sequences
are required to improve the spatial and temporal resolution, as well as increase 
the image contrast and signal-to-noise ratio.

PMID: 26791734  [PubMed - in process]


9. Inflammopharmacology. 2016 Feb;24(1):1-10. doi: 10.1007/s10787-015-0255-y. Epub
2016 Jan 11.

Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a review of initiators and protective
factors.

Ellulu MS(1), Patimah I(2), Khaza'ai H(3), Rahmat A(4), Abed Y(5), Ali F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400, Serdang, Malaysia.
mohdsubhilulu@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400, Serdang, Malaysia.
patimah@upm.edu.my. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400, Serdang, Malaysia.
huzwah@upm.edu.my. (4)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400, Serdang, Malaysia.
asmah@upm.edu.my. (5)Faculty of Public Health, Al Quds University of Gaza, Gaza, 
Palestine. yabed333@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400, Serdang,
Malaysia. faisalhassanh@upm.edu.my.

Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a collective term comprising of a
group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels. These diseases are the largest
cause of morbidity and premature death worldwide. Coronary heart disease and
cerebrovascular disease (stroke) are the most frequently occurring diseases. The 
two major initiators involved in the development of atherosclerotic CVD are
vascular production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lipid oxidation. In
atherosclerosis development, ROS is associated with rapid loss of
anti-inflammatory and anti-atherogenic activities of the endothelium-derived
nitric oxide (NO(·)) resulting in endothelial dysfunction. In part involving
activation of the transcription factor NF-κB, ROS have been involved in signaling
cascades leading to vascular pro-inflammatory and pro-thrombotic gene expression.
ROS is also a potent activator of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which
indicate plaque destabilization and rupture. The second initiator involved in
atherosclerotic CVD is the oxidation of low-density lipoproteins (LDL). Oxidation
of LDL in vessel wall leads to an inflammatory cascade that activates atherogenic
pathway leading to foam cell formation. The accumulation of foam cells leads to
fatty streak formation, which is the earliest visible atherosclerotic lesion. In 
contrast, the cardiac sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) and
hepatic apolipoprotein E (apoE) expression can improve cardiovascular function.
SERCA2a regulates the cardiac contractile function by lowering cytoplasmic
calcium levels during relaxation, and affecting NO(·) action in vascular cells,
while apoE is a critical ligand in the plasma clearance of triglyceride- and
cholesterol-rich lipoproteins.

PMID: 26750181  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Dec 29. pii: S1388-1981(15)00235-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2015.12.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Small but smart: MicroRNAs orchestrate atherosclerosis development and
progression.

Santovito D(1), Egea V(1), Weber C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany. (2)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany; German Centre for
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich,
Germany. Electronic address: chweber@med.lmu.de.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNA able to bind specific sequences on
target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and thereby to post-transcriptionally modulate gene
expression. Being expressed in all vertebrate cell types, miRNAs have emerged as 
key players in a wide array of biological processes, including cell
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Over the past decade, knowledge
concerning the contribution of miRNAs to human pathology has grown with an
astonishing pace. In particular, a major involvement of miRNAs in atherosclerosis
as a leading cause of global mortality has been supported by ample evidence from 
in vitro, in vivo and clinical studies. This review aims to summarize and
highlight current concepts of miRNA function in the continuum of atherogenesis
ranging from risk factors (i.e. dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension), to
endothelial dysfunction up to the events leading to plaque rupture. Areas in need
for further research and potential perspectives for translational applications
will be scrutinized. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: MicroRNAs 
and lipid/energy metabolism and related diseases edited by Carlos
Fernández-Hernando and Yajaira Suárez.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26738655  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Eur Heart J. 2015 Dec 24. pii: ehv653. [Epub ahead of print]

Cholesterol crystal induced arterial inflammation and destabilization of
atherosclerotic plaque.

Janoudi A(1), Shamoun FE(2), Kalavakunta JK(3), Abela GS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA. (2)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic,
Phoenix, AZ, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA Borgess Hospital, Kalamazoo, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA Department of Physiology, Division of Pathology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA george.abela@ht.msu.edu.

Evolution of plaque that is prone to rupture is characterized by inflammation and
physical changes. Accumulation of low-density lipoprotein in the sub-intima
provides esterified cholesterol (ESC) to macrophages and smooth muscle cells that
convert it into free cholesterol (FRC) by cholesteryl ester hydrolases (CEHs).
Membrane-bound cholesterol carriers transport FRC to high-density lipoprotein
(HDL). Impaired HDL transport function and altered composition can lead to
extracellular accumulation of FRC, whereas impaired membrane carrier activity can
lead to intracellular FRC accumulation. Saturation of FRC can result in
cholesterol crystallization with cell death and intimal injury. Disequilibrium
between ESC and FRC can impact foam cell and cholesterol crystal (CC) formation. 
Cholesterol crystals initiate inflammation via NLRP3 inflammasome leading to
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) production inducing C-reactive protein. Eventually,
crystals growing from within the plaque and associated inflammation destabilize
the plaque. Thus, inhibition of inflammation by antagonists to IL-1β or agents
that dissolve or prevent CC formation may stabilize vulnerable plaques.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26705388  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Genom Data. 2015 Sep 3;6:136-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.08.027. eCollection
2015.

The pro-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory foam cell macrophage paradox.

Thomas AC(1), Eijgelaar WJ(2), Daemen MJ(3), Newby AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, The
Netherlands. (3)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht,
The Netherlands ; Academisch Medisch Centrum (AMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The formation of foamy macrophages by sequestering extracellular modified lipids 
is a key event in atherosclerosis. However, there is controversy about the
effects of lipid loading on macrophage phenotype, with in vitro evidence
suggesting either pro- or anti-inflammatory consequences. To investigate this in 
vivo we compared the transcriptomes of foamy and non-foamy macrophages that
accumulate in experimental subcutaneous granulomas in fat-fed ApoE null mice or
normal chow-fed wild-type mice, respectively. Consistent with previous studies in
peritoneal macrophages from LDL receptor null mice (Spann et al., 2012 [1]), we
found that anti-inflammatory LXR/RXR pathway genes were over-represented in the
foamy macrophages, but there was no change in M1 or M2 phenotypic markers. Quite 
unexpectedly, however, we found that genes related to the induction of fibrosis
had also been up-regulated (Thomas et al., 2015 [2]). The progression of the
foamy macrophages along anti-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic pathways was confirmed
using immunohistochemistry (described fully in our primary research article
(Thomas et al., 2015 [2]). Here we provide additional details on production of
the macrophages and their transcriptomic comparison, with the raw and processed
microarray data deposited in GEO (accession number GSE70126). Our observations on
these cells are indeed paradoxical, because foamy macrophages have long been
implicated in promoting inflammation, extracellular matrix degradation and
atherosclerotic plaque rupture, which must be provoked by additional local
mediators. Our findings probably explain how very early macrophage-rich lesions
maintain their structural integrity.

PMCID: PMC4664709
PMID: 26697355  [PubMed]


13. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2016 Mar;14(3):391-403. doi:
10.1586/14779072.2016.1128828. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

A focus on inflammation as a major risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular
diseases.

Gregersen I(1,)(2), Holm S(1,)(3), Dahl TB(1,)(2), Halvorsen B(1,)(2,)(4),
Aukrust P(1,)(2,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Research Institute of Internal Medicine , Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet , Oslo , Norway. (2)b Faculty of Medicine , University of Oslo ,
Oslo , Norway. (3)c Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases , Lillehammer , Norway. (4)d 
K.G. Jebsen Inflammatory Research Center , University of Oslo , Oslo , Norway.
(5)e Section of Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases , Oslo University
Hospital Rikshospitalet , Oslo , Norway.

Atherosclerosis is a dynamic, pathogenic process in the artery wall, with
potential adverse outcome for the host. Acute events such as myocardial
infarction and ischemic stroke often result from rupture of unstable
atherosclerotic lesions. Understanding the underlying pathology of such lesions
and why and when they rupture, is therefore of great interest for the development
of new diagnostics and treatment. Inflammation is one of the key drivers of
atherosclerotic plaque development and the interplay between inflammation and
lipids constitutes the hallmark of atherosclerotic disease. This review
summarizes the role of inflammation in atherosclerosis and presents some of the
latest discoveries as well as unmet needs regarding the role of inflammation as
major risk factor in atherosclerotic disease.

PMID: 26641944  [PubMed - in process]


14. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015 Dec 3. pii: 2047487315619733. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-term prognostic utility of pentraxin 3 and D-dimer as compared to
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and B-type natriuretic peptide in suspected
acute coronary syndrome.

Mjelva ØR(1), Pönitz V(2), Brügger-Andersen T(2), Grundt H(3), Staines H(4),
Nilsen DW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
oisteinm@broadpark.no. (2)Department of Cardiology, Stavanger University
Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. (3)Department of Medicine, Stavanger University
Hospital, Stavanger, Norway Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway. (4)Sigma Statistical Services, Balmullo, UK. (5)Department of
Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Cardiology, 
Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Vascular inflammation plays a key role in the development of
atherosclerosis and acute coronary syndrome (ACS), and pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is one 
of several novel, promising markers of inflammation. In addition, D-dimer might
serve as a marker of thrombogenesis and a hypercoagulable state following plaque 
rupture. The present study assesses the prognostic utility of these two
biomarkers as compared to high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP), in addition to conventional clinical risk factors for 
coronary heart disease in patients with suspected ACS.
METHODS: Chest pain patients with suspected ACS (n = 871) were consecutively
included in a prospective, observational study with a follow-up time of 84
months.
RESULTS: At 7-year follow-up, 332 patients had died and 203 had suffered an
adverse troponin T-positive, non-fatal cardiac event. In the multivariate
analysis, levels of PTX3 above 5.88 ng/mL (median) and D-dimer above 436 µg/L
(lower limit upper quartile) independently predicted mortality (HR 1.60 [95% CI
1.10-2.33]; p = 0.014 and HR 1.83 [95% CI 1.20-2.78]; p = 0.005, respectively).
Also, BNP levels above 310.75 pg/mL (lower limit upper quartile) (HR 2.16 [95% CI
1.37-3.42]; p = 0.001), but not hsCRP, independently predicted mortality. Only
hsCRP and BNP also predicted future myocardial infarction (HR 1.59 [95% CI
1.05-2.40]; p = 0.029 and HR 1.91 [95% CI 1.10-3.31]; p = 0.021, respectively).
CONCLUSION: High levels of PTX3, D-dimer and BNP were found to be independent,
long-term predictors of all-cause mortality in chest pain patients with a
suspected ACS. hsCRP and BNP also predicted future myocardial infarction.

© The European Society of Cardiology 2015.

PMID: 26635361  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Korean J Radiol. 2015 Nov-Dec;16(6):1257-61. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2015.16.6.1257.
Epub 2015 Oct 26.

F-18 Fluoride Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography for Detecting
Atherosclerotic Plaques.

Kang WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College 
of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.

A large number of major cardiovascular events occur in patients due to minimal or
some lumen narrowing of the coronary artery. Recent biological studies have shown
that the biological composition or vulnerability of the plaque is more critical
for plaque rupture compared to the degree of stenosis. To overcome the
limitations of anatomical images, molecular imaging techniques have been
suggested as promising imaging tools in various fields. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG), which is widely used in the field of oncology, is an example of molecular 
probes used in atherosclerotic plaque evaluation. FDG is a marker of plaque
macrophage glucose utilization and inflammation, which is a prominent
characteristic of vulnerable plaque. Recently, F-18 fluoride has been used to
visualize vulnerable plaque in clinical studies. F-18 fluoride accumulates in
regions of active microcalcification, which is normally observed during the early
stages of plaque formation. More studies are warranted on the accumulation of
F-18 fluoride and plaque formation/vulnerability; however, due to high specific
accumulation, low background activity, and easy accessibility, F-18 fluoride is
emerging as a promising non-invasive imaging probe to detect vulnerable plaque.

PMCID: PMC4644746
PMID: 26576114  [PubMed - in process]


16. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):663-71. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.011. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Neutrophil's weapons in atherosclerosis.

Chistiakov DA(1), Bobryshev YV(2), Orekhov AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetic Diagnostics and Cell Biology, Division of
Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Pediatrics, Research Center for Children's
Health, 119991 Moscow, Russia. (2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medical
Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; School of
Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, NSW 2560, Australia;
Institute for Atherosclerosis Research, Skolkovo Innovative Center, Moscow
121609, Russia. Electronic address: y.bobryshev@unsw.edu.au. (3)Institute for
Atherosclerosis Research, Skolkovo Innovative Center, Moscow 121609, Russia;
Laboratory of Angiopathology, Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 125315, Russia; Department of Biophysics,
Biological Faculty, Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia.

Neutrophils are important components of immunity associated with inflammatory
responses against a broad spectrum of pathogens. These cells could be rapidly
activated by proinflammatory stimuli and migrate to the inflamed and infected
sites where they release a variety of cytotoxic molecules with antimicrobial
activity. Neutrophil antibacterial factors include extracellular proteases, redox
enzymes, antimicrobial peptides, and small bioactive molecules. In resting
neutrophils, these factors are stored in granules and released upon activation
during degranulation. These factors could be also secreted in a
neutrophil-derived microparticle-dependent fashion. Neutrophils exhibit a unique 
property to produce neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) composed of decondensed
chromatin and granular proteins to catch and kill bacteria. Neutrophil-released
factors are efficient in inactivation and elimination of pathogens through
oxidation-dependent or independent damage of bacterial cells, inactivation and
neutralization of virulence factors and other mechanisms. However, in chronic
atherosclerosis-associated inflammation, protective function of neutrophils could
be impaired and misdirected against own cells. This could lead to deleterious
effects and progressive vascular injury. In atherogenesis, a pathogenic role of
neutrophils could be especially seen in early stages associated with endothelial 
dysfunction and induction of vascular inflammation and in late atherosclerosis
associated with plaque rupture and atherothrombosis. Assuming a prominent impact 
of neutrophils in cardiovascular pathology, developing therapeutic strategies
targeting neutrophil-specific antigens could have a promising clinical potential.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26551083  [PubMed - in process]


17. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Dec;243(2):573-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.10.097. Epub 2015 Oct 24.

Oral microbiota in patients with atherosclerosis.

Fåk F(1), Tremaroli V(2), Bergström G(2), Bäckhed F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory and Sahlgrenska Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic 
Research, Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of
Gothenburg, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address:
Frida.Fak@food-health-science.lu.se. (2)Wallenberg Laboratory and Sahlgrenska
Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Department of Molecular and
Clinical Medicine, University of Gothenburg, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Laboratory and Sahlgrenska Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic 
Research, Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of
Gothenburg, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Basic Metabolic Research, Section for Metabolic Receptology and
Enteroendocrinology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: Fredrik.Backhed@wlab.gu.se.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Recent evidence suggests that the microbiota may be
considered as an environmental factor that contributes to the development of
atherosclerosis. Periodontal disease has been associated with cardio- and
cerebrovascular events, and inflammation in the periodontium is suggested to
increase the systemic inflammatory level of the host, which may in turn influence
plaque composition and rupture. We previously showed that bacteria from the oral 
cavity and the gut could be found in atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS: To elucidate whether the oral microbiota composition differed between
patients with asymptomatic and symptomatic atherosclerosis we performed
pyrosequencing of the oral microbiota of 92 individuals including patients with
asymptomatic and symptomatic atherosclerosis and control individuals without
carotid plaques or previous stroke or myocardial infarction.
RESULTS: The overall microbial structure was similar in controls and
atherosclerosis patients, but patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis had
higher relative abundance of Anaeroglobus (mean 0.040% (SD 0.049)) than the
control group (0.010% (SD 0.028)) (P = 0.03). Using linear regression analysis,
we found that Parvimonas associated positively with uCRP and Capnocytophaga,
Catonella and Lactobacillus associated with blood lipid markers. In conclusion,
abundance of Anaeroglobus in the oral cavity could be associated with symptomatic
atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26536303  [PubMed - in process]


18. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(35):5151-9.

The role of interleukin 35 in atherosclerosis.

Lin J, Kakkar V, Lu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mary and Garry Weston Molecular Immunology Laboratory, Thrombosis Research
Institute, London, SW3 6LR, United Kingdom. xlu@tri-london.ac.uk.

Atherosclerosis has been widely recognized as a slow progressing inflammatory
disease of the arterial walls involving both inflammation and autoimmune
processes with a complex etiology in which the immune system plays a key role. A 
hallmark of atherosclerosis is that the macrophages pick up the lipids to form
the foam cells which build up the plaque in the arterial wall. Consequently, the 
arteries become narrowed. Plaque rupture can trigger thrombosis which is
superimposed on atherosclerotic lesion. The activation of macrophages and T cells
plays key roles in these lesions. Cells involved in the atherosclerotic process
secrete soluble factors, known as cytokines. These cytokines can be further
divided into two classes namely proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines
based on their roles in inflammation. Among the cytokines, interleukin (IL)-35 is
the one most recently discovered that suppresses inflammatory responses of immune
cells. Accumulating evidence suggests that IL-35 represents an attractive target 
for antiatherosclerotic therapy based on its several atheroprotective features.
In this review, we will provide a brief overview of IL-35 biology and the role of
IL-35 in the development, or the progression of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 26530251  [PubMed - in process]


19. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Oct;75 Suppl 1:S5. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.10.837. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Modulation of cell signaling pathways by oxysterols in age-related human
diseases.

Leonarduzzi G(1), Gargiulo S(1), Gamba P(1), Testa G(1), Sottero B(1), Rossin
D(1), Staurenghi E(1), Poli G(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Torino (University of Torino), Clinical and Biological Sciences,
Italy.

Cholesterol oxidation products, named oxysterols, may derive from the diet or
originate endogenously by autoxidative nonenzymatic modification of cholesterol
as well as through enxymatic pathways involved in lipid metabolism and
maintenance of cholesterol homeostasis. Oxysterols have been shown to exert
several in vitro and in vivo biochemical activities of both physiologic and
pathologic relevance and they appear to be implicated in the pathogenesis of
various age-related chronic diseases, including atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's
disease (AD), where hypercholesterolemia represents a primary risk factor, and a 
redox state impairment and inflammation seem to play a central role. Our recent
studies show that, in cells of the macrophage lineage or in human neuronal cells 
(differentiated or not), respectively in the contest of atherosclerosis or AD,
oxysterols can initiate specific signal transduction pathways that are relevant
to the development of these diseases. Regarding atherosclerosis, we have observed
that oxysterols can contribute to plaque instability and rupture by enhancing
inflammatory responses and matrix turnover through an unbalanced up-regulation of
MMP-9. Concerning AD, we have demonstrated that oxysterols may promote
neuroinflammatory changes and accelerate APP processing toward β-amyloid
production by up-regulating APP and BACE1 protein levels. In addition, TLR4, a
key player of immune and inflammatory signaling responses, seems to have an
important role in the pathogenesis of both atherosclerosis and AD.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26461396  [PubMed]


20. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1339:333-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2929-0_23.

Tandem Stenosis to Induce Atherosclerotic Plaque Instability in the Mouse.

Chen YC(1,)(2), Rivera J(1), Peter K(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Atherothrombosis and Vascular Biology, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute,
St Kilda Road Central, 6492, Melbourne, VIC, 8008, Australia. (2)Departments of
Medicine and Immunology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Atherothrombosis and Vascular Biology, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute,
St Kilda Road Central, 6492, Melbourne, VIC, 8008, Australia.
karlheinz.peter@bakeridi.edu.au. (4)Departments of Medicine and Immunology,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. karlheinz.peter@bakeridi.edu.au.

Despite the number of animal models of atherosclerosis, a major limitation in
research on mechanisms of plaque rupture is the lack of appropriate
atherosclerotic mouse models where lesions develop and progress to a vulnerable
and thus rupture-prone phenotype that is typically observed in humans. Most
animal models of atherosclerosis typically represent a few but not the full
combination of the characteristics seen in human unstable/ruptured plaques. Such 
characteristics most importantly include a thin and ruptured fibrous cap, plaque 
inflammation, neovascularization within the plaque (vasa vasorum), plaque
hemorrhage, and intravascular (often occlusive) thrombus formation. Ideally, an
animal model of plaque instability/rupture would respond to current
pharmacological interventions known to reduce the risk of plaque rupture, such as
statins. Here we describe a mouse model of plaque instability/rupture that is
based on the surgical introduction of a tandem stenosis in the carotid artery.
This model results in the formation of unstable atherosclerotic plaques that
reflect human plaque pathology. It will allow to further understanding of plaque 
instability/rupture, to identify the participating factors such as specific
proteins, genes and microRNAs, and to develop imaging methods towards the
detection of vulnerable, rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 26445800  [PubMed - in process]


21. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1339:235-46. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2929-0_16.

In Vitro Macrophage Phagocytosis Assay.

Hamczyk MR(1), Villa-Bellosta R(1), Andrés V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Cardiovascular Pathophysiology, Vascular
Biology Program, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III
(CNIC), Madrid, Spain. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Cardiovascular
Pathophysiology, Vascular Biology Program, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid, Spain. vandres@cnic.es.

The key roles of macrophages in atherosclerosis include the phagocytosis of
apoptotic and necrotic cells and cell debris, whose accumulation in
atherosclerotic lesions exacerbates inflammation and promotes plaque
vulnerability. Evidence is accumulating that macrophage phagocytic functions peak
at the early stages of atherosclerosis and that the reduced phagocytosis at the
late stages of disease leads to the generation of necrotic cores and a defective 
resolution of inflammation, which in turn promotes plaque rupture, thrombus
formation, and life-threatening acute ischemic events (myocardial infarction and 
stroke). The impaired resolution of inflammation in advanced lesions featuring
loss of macrophage phagocytic activity may be in part due to an imbalance between
M1 and M2 subsets of polarized macrophages. A better understanding of the
mechanisms that regulate macrophage phagocytic activity in the context of
atherosclerosis may therefore help identify novel therapeutic targets. This
chapter presents a protocol for establishing primary mouse macrophage cultures, a
method for polarizing macrophages to the M1 and M2 states, and a method for the
in vitro study of macrophage phagocytosis of IgG-opsonized or IgM/complement
component 3-opsonized erythrocytes.

PMID: 26445793  [PubMed - in process]


22. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 Sep 28;6:153. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00153.
eCollection 2015.

Mineralocorticoid Receptors in the Pathophysiology of Vascular Inflammation and
Atherosclerosis.

Moss ME(1), Jaffe IZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tufts Medical Center, Molecular Cardiology Research Institute , Boston, MA ,
USA ; Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of 
Medicine , Boston, MA , USA.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the vasculature that causes 
significant morbidity and mortality from myocardial infarction, stroke, and
peripheral vascular disease. Landmark clinical trials revealed that
mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) antagonists improve outcomes in cardiovascular
patients. Conversely, enhanced MR activation by the hormone aldosterone is
associated with increased risk of MI, stroke, and cardiovascular death. This
review summarizes recent advances in our understanding of the role of aldosterone
and the MR in the pathogenesis of vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis as it
proceeds from risk factor-induced endothelial dysfunction and inflammation to
plaque formation, progression, and ultimately rupture with thrombosis, the cause 
of acute ischemia. The role of the MR in converting cardiac risk factors into
endothelial dysfunction, in enhancing leukocyte adhesion and infiltration into
the vasculature, in promoting systemic inflammation and vascular oxidative
stress, and in plaque destabilization and thrombosis are discussed. A greater
understanding of the mechanisms by which the MR promotes atherosclerosis has
substantial potential to identify novel treatment targets to improve
cardiovascular health and decrease mortality.

PMCID: PMC4585008
PMID: 26441842  [PubMed]


23. ARYA Atheroscler. 2015 May;11(3):191-5.

Adiponectin inhibits oxidized low density lipoprotein-induced increase in matrix 
metalloproteinase 9 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Saneipour M(1), Ghatreh-Samani K(2), Heydarian E(3), Farrokhi E(4), Abdian N(4).

Author information: 
(1)MSc Student, Clinical Biochemistry Research Center, Shahrekord University of
Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (2)Assistant Professor, Clinical Biochemistry
Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.
(3)Associate Professor, Clinical Biochemistry Research Center, Shahrekord
University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)PhD Candidate, Cellular and 
Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord,
Iran.

BACKGROUND: High expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) during vascular 
injury and inflammation plays an important role in atherosclerotic plaque
formation and rupture. In the process of atherosclerosis, oxidized low-density
lipoprotein (oxLDL) upregulates MMP9 in human aortic vascular smooth muscle cells
(HA/VSMCs). Adiponectin is an adipose tissue-derived hormone that has been shown 
to exert anti-atherogenic and anti-inflammatory effects. The aim of this study
was to investigate the effect of adiponectin on MMP9 expression under pathogenic 
condition created by oxLDL in HA/VSMCs.
METHODS: In this experimental study, HA/VSMC were stimulated with oxLDL alone and
in the presence of adiponectin for 24 and 48 h. The expression of MMP9 gene was
determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction method. The protein level of
this gene was investigated by western blotting technique.
RESULTS: An oxLDL increased MMP9 expression 2.16 ± 0.24- and 3.32 ± 0.25-fold
after 24 and 48 h, respectively and adiponectin decreased oxLDL-induced MMP9
expression in a time-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: These results show that adiponectin changes extracellular matrix by
reducing MMP9 mRNA and protein, therefore, may stabilize lesions and reduce
atheroma rupture.

PMCID: PMC4568192
PMID: 26405452  [PubMed]


24. Curr Pharm Des. 2015 Sep 15. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of interleukin 35 in atherosclerosis.

Lin J, Kakkar V, Lu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mary and Garry Weston Molecular Immunology Laboratory, Thrombosis Research
Institute, London, SW3 6LR, United Kingdom. xlu@tri-london.ac.uk.

Atherosclerosis has been widely recognized as a slow progressing inflammatory
disease of the arterial walls involving both inflammation and autoimmune
processes with a complex etiology in which the immune system plays a key role. A 
hallmark of atherosclerosis is that the macrophages pick up the lipids to form
the foam cells which build up the plaque in the arterial wall. Consequently, the 
arteries become narrowed. Plaque rupture can trigger thrombosis which is
superimposed on atherosclerotic lesion. The activation of macrophages and T cells
plays key roles in these lesions. Cells involved in the atherosclerotic process
secrete soluble factors, known as cytokines. These cytokines can be further
divided into two classes namely proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines
based on their roles in inflammation. Among the cytokines, interleukin (IL)-35 is
the one most recently discovered that suppresses inflammatory responses of immune
cells. Accumulating evidence suggests that IL-35 represents an attractive target 
for anti-atherosclerotic therapy based on its several atheroprotective features. 
In this review, we will provide a brief overview of IL-35 biology and the role of
IL-35 in the development, or the progression of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 26369677  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2015 Aug;5(4):280-9. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2223-3652.2015.05.06.

Inflammation, plaque progression and vulnerability: evidence from intravascular
ultrasound imaging.

Kataoka Y(1), Puri R(1), Nicholls SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 South Australian Health & Medical Research Institute, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia ; 2 Cleveland Clinic Co-ordinating Center for
Clinical Research (C5), Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Increasing evidence points to a critical role of inflammation in the development 
and propagation of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Pathological studies
in human and animal models have elucidated specific inflammatory mediators
contributing to the progression and rupture of atherosclerotic plaque in the
artery wall. These observations not only outline the importance of inflammation
in atheroma progression but also the potential of anti-inflammatory therapeutic
approaches to prevent and stabilize atherosclerotic disease. Intravascular
ultrasonography enables direct atheroma visualization in vivo. Additionally,
refinements in ultrasound technology permitting radiofrequency backscatter
analysis enhance plaque characterization associated with disease instability.
These imaging modalities will continue to provide opportunities for evaluating
novel inflammatory mechanisms and anti-inflammatory therapies.

PMCID: PMC4536481
PMID: 26331112  [PubMed]


26. Lancet. 2015 Feb 26;385 Suppl 1:S91. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60406-8.

Evaluation of carotid plaque inflammation in patients with active rheumatoid
arthritis using (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET-CT and MRI: a pilot study.

Skeoch S(1), Williams H(2), Cristinacce P(2), Hockings P(3), James J(4),
Alexander Y(5), Waterton J(6), Bruce I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, Centre for Musculoskeletal
Research, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Manchester, UK; NIHR Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
sarah.skeoch@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk. (2)Biomedical Imaging Institute,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, 
UK. (3)Drug Safety and Metabolism, AstraZeneca, Molindal, Sweden; MedTech West,
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK. (5)Healthcare Science 
Research Institute, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK.
(6)AstraZeneca Personalised Healthcare & Biomarkers, Alderley Park, Macclesfield,
UK. (7)The Kellgren Centre for Rheumatology, NIHR Manchester, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with a 50% increased risk in
cardiovascular mortality. Inflammation is thought to accelerate atherosclerosis
and might also lead to an inflammatory rupture-prone plaque phenotype. We tested 
the hypothesis that patients with active rheumatoid arthritis also have carotid
plaque inflammation and that plaque inflammation correlates with clinical and
serological markers of inflammation.
METHODS: Patients with active rheumatoid arthritis, defined as the Disease
Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28) score of more than 3·2, were recruited to a
single centre study in the UK. Patients with carotid plaque on ultrasound
underwent carotid MRI followed by (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose ((18)F-FDG) PET-CT.
Scans were co-registered and analysed by a physicist, masked to clinical
information. The maximum standardised uptake values (SUV(max)) were measured in
the plaque area. The association of SUV with DAS28, C-reactive protein, and
CD4+CD28- T-cell frequency was tested with non-parametric statistics. Ethics
approval and informed consent were obtained.
FINDINGS: Scans were done in 13 patients, nine of whom were women. Median age was
60 years (IQR 57-65), disease duration was 11 years (6-25), and DAS28 score was
4·52 (4·32-5·13). None had a history or symptoms of clinical cardiovascular
disease or took statins. All plaques caused less than 70% stenosis, and tracer
uptake in plaque was seen on PET in all 13 patients. Median SUV(max) was 2·18
(IQR 2·00-2·65), and all cases had an SUV(max) greater than 1·6 (the threshold
for defining carotid plaque inflammation). There was a significant association
with SUV(max) and C-reactive protein (r=0·58, p=0·04) and quartiles of CD4+CD28- 
T-cell frequency (p=0·045), but not with low-density lipoprotein concentrations
(r=-0·49, p=0·09) or DAS28 score (r=0·38, p=0·20). No association was found with 
age (r=0·13, p=0·69) or sex (p=0·64).
INTERPRETATION: In this small pilot study, plaque inflammation was seen in all
patients and correlated with C-reactive protein. Whether this finding represents 
simultaneous joint and plaque inflammation, which might improve on treatment of
joint disease, remains to be determined. CD4+CD28- T-cells are known to predict
cardiovascular events in patients with angina. Their association with plaque
inflammation in this study suggests a possible role in cardiovascular risk
prediction in rheumatoid arthritis. Larger studies are warranted to investigate
these findings further.
FUNDING: North West England MRC Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Clinical
Research Fellowship, National Institute for Health Research,
AstraZeneca-University of Manchester Strategic Alliance Fund.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26312914  [PubMed]


27. Sci Adv. 2015 Apr;1(3). pii: e1400223.

Inhibiting macrophage proliferation suppresses atherosclerotic plaque
inflammation.

Tang J(1), Lobatto ME(2), Hassing L(2), van der Staay S(2), van Rijs SM(2),
Calcagno C(3), Braza MS(3), Baxter S(3), Fay F(3), Sanchez-Gaytan BL(3),
Duivenvoorden R(4), Sager H(5), Astudillo YM(6), Leong W(1), Ramachandran S(3),
Storm G(7), Pérez-Medina C(3), Reiner T(8), Cormode DP(9), Strijkers GJ(10),
Stroes ES(4), Swirski FK(5), Nahrendorf M(5), Fisher EA(6), Fayad ZA(3), Mulder
WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational and Molecular Imaging Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York 10029, NY, USA ; Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (2)Translational and 
Molecular Imaging Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York
10029, NY, USA ; Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. (3)Translational and Molecular Imaging
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York 10029, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ,
The Netherlands. (5)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
and Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (6)Department of Medicine (Cardiology) and
Cell Biology, Marc and Ruti Bell Program in Vascular Biology, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (7)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Universiteitsweg 99,
3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Department of Controlled Drug Delivery, MIRA
Institute for Biomedical Engineering and Technical Medicine, University of
Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Radiology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave., New York, NY 10065. (9)Department 
of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(10)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Inflammation drives atherosclerotic plaque progression and rupture, and is a
compelling therapeutic target. Consequently, attenuating inflammation by reducing
local macrophage accumulation is an appealing approach. This can potentially be
accomplished by either blocking blood monocyte recruitment to the plaque or
increasing macrophage apoptosis and emigration. Because macrophage proliferation 
was recently shown to dominate macrophage accumulation in advanced plaques,
locally inhibiting macrophage proliferation may reduce plaque inflammation and
produce long-term therapeutic benefits. To test this hypothesis, we used
nanoparticle-based delivery of simvastatin to inhibit plaque macrophage
proliferation in apolipoprotein E deficient mice (Apoe(-/-) ) with advanced
atherosclerotic plaques. This resulted in rapid reduction of plaque inflammation 
and favorable phenotype remodeling. We then combined this short-term nanoparticle
intervention with an eight-week oral statin treatment, and this regimen rapidly
reduced and continuously suppressed plaque inflammation. Our results demonstrate 
that pharmacologically inhibiting local macrophage proliferation can effectively 
treat inflammation in atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4539616
PMID: 26295063  [PubMed]


28. Microsc Res Tech. 2015 Nov;78(11):969-74. doi: 10.1002/jemt.22560. Epub 2015 Aug 
17.

Role of cholesterol crystals in atherosclerosis is unmasked by altering tissue
preparation methods.

Nasiri M(1), Janoudi A(1), Vanderberg A(2), Frame M(2), Flegler C, Flegler S(2), 
Abela GS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan. (2)Center for Advanced Microscopy, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan. (3)Department of Physiology, Division of
Pathology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.

Standard tissue preparation for light and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) uses
ethanol as a dehydrating agent but that can also dissolve cholesterol crystals
(CC) leaving behind empty tissue imprints or "clefts". Cholesterol crystals may
contribute to plaque rupture by their sharp tips that can tear membranes and
trigger inflammation. Therefore, use of ethanol in tissue processing can mask the
pathological role of CC. Here we evaluated the amount of cholesterol dissolved
from CC with single and complete series of standard graded ethanol concentrations
(25-100%) used in tissue preparation. Also, solubility of CC in ethanol at
physiological levels was measured. Furthermore, we compared the effect of ethanol
on CC in fresh human atherosclerotic plaques to matched segments dehydrated using
vacuum (-1 atm, 12h). Tissue crystal density ranging from 0 to +3 was measured
semi-quantitatively by SEM. For CC exposed to 25% and 100% ethanol for 10 min
each, 0.38% and 95% of CC were dissolved respectively. Also, increase in CC
solubility was significant at physiological levels of ethanol (0.16%) compared to
water (43.4 ± 18.0 ng/mL vs. 30.9 ± 13.9 ng/mL; p < 0.05). We speculate that this
could represent a potential mechanism of cardio-protective effects of alcohol
consumption. In atherosclerotic plaques, CC density was lower in ethanol vs.
saline treatment (+1.2 vs. +2.8; P < 0.01) with visible dissolving noted by SEM. 
Ethanol has been used for centuries in tissue preparation for microscopy. Here we
demonstrate how current tissue preparation methods greatly alter histological
findings with SEM by masking the potential mechanism of plaque rupture.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26278962  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Intern Med. 2015 Nov;278(5):483-93. doi: 10.1111/joim.12406. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Inflammation and plaque vulnerability.

Hansson GK(1), Libby P(2), Tabas I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Department of
Pathology and Cell Biology, and Department of Physiology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Atherosclerosis is a maladaptive, nonresolving chronic inflammatory disease that 
occurs at sites of blood flow disturbance. The disease usually remains silent
until a breakdown of integrity at the arterial surface triggers the formation of 
a thrombus. By occluding the lumen, the thrombus or emboli detaching from it
elicits ischaemic symptoms that may be life-threatening. Two types of surface
damage can cause atherothrombosis: plaque rupture and endothelial erosion. Plaque
rupture is thought to be caused by loss of mechanical stability, often due to
reduced tensile strength of the collagen cap surrounding the plaque. Therefore,
plaques with reduced collagen content are thought to be more vulnerable than
those with a thick collagen cap. Endothelial erosion, on the other hand, may
occur after injurious insults to the endothelium instigated by metabolic
disturbance or immune insults. This review discusses the molecular mechanisms
involved in plaque vulnerability and the development of atherothrombosis.

© 2015 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

PMID: 26260307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Sep;242(1):357-66. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.07.035. Epub 2015 Jul 22.

Biologic plausibility, cellular effects, and molecular mechanisms of
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) in atherosclerosis.

Borow KM(1), Nelson JR(2), Mason RP(3).

Author information: 
(1)MediMergent, LLC and The National Medication Safety, Outcomes and Adherence
Program, 407 Wyntre Lea Drive, Bryn Mawr, PA 19010, USA. Electronic address:
kborow@gmail.com. (2)UCSF School of Medicine, Fresno-Medicine Residency
Program-Volunteer, 7061 N. Whitney Street, Suite 101, Fresno, CA 93720, USA.
Electronic address: JR4Nelson@yahoo.com. (3)Harvard Medical School, 100 Cummings 
Center, Suite 135L, Beverly, MA 01915, USA. Electronic address:
rpmason@elucidaresearch.com.

Residual cardiovascular (CV) risk remains in dyslipidemic patients despite
intensive statin therapy, underscoring the need for additional intervention.
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), an omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid, is
incorporated into membrane phospholipids and atherosclerotic plaques and exerts
beneficial effects on the pathophysiologic cascade from onset of plaque formation
through rupture. Specific salutary actions have been reported relating to
endothelial function, oxidative stress, foam cell formation, inflammation, plaque
formation/progression, platelet aggregation, thrombus formation, and plaque
rupture. EPA also improves atherogenic dyslipidemia characterized by reduction of
triglycerides without raising low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Other
beneficial effects of EPA include vasodilation, resulting in blood pressure
reductions, as well as improved membrane fluidity. EPA's effects are at least
additive to those of statins when given as adjunctive therapy. In this review, we
present data supporting the biologic plausibility of EPA as an
anti-atherosclerotic agent with potential clinical benefit for prevention of CV
events, as well as its cellular effects and molecular mechanisms of action.
REDUCE-IT is an ongoing, randomized, controlled study evaluating whether the
high-purity ethyl ester of EPA (icosapent ethyl) at 4 g/day combined with statin 
therapy is superior to statin therapy alone for reducing CV events in high-risk
patients with mixed dyslipidemia. The results from this study are expected to
clarify the role of EPA as adjunctive therapy to a statin for reduction of
residual CV risk.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26253795  [PubMed - in process]


31. Adv Clin Chem. 2015;70:1-30. doi: 10.1016/bs.acc.2015.03.004. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Nuclear Factor-κB Activation as a Pathological Mechanism of Lipid Metabolism and 
Atherosclerosis.

Yu XH(1), Zheng XL(2), Tang CK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Atherosclerology of Hunan Province, Molecular Target New
Drug Discovery and Cooperative Innovation Center of Hunan Province, Life Science 
Research Center, University of South China, Hengyang, PR China. (2)Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Libin Cardiovascular Institute of
Alberta, Cumming School of Medicine, The University of Calgary, Health Sciences
Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (3)Key Laboratory for Atherosclerology of Hunan
Province, Molecular Target New Drug Discovery and Cooperative Innovation Center
of Hunan Province, Life Science Research Center, University of South China,
Hengyang, PR China. Electronic address: tangchaoke@qq.com.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the arterial wall with
lipid-laden lesions, involving a complex interaction between multiple different
cell types and cytokine networks. Inflammatory responses mark all stages of
atherogenesis: from lipid accumulation in the intima to plaque formation and
eventual rupture. One of the most important regulators of inflammation is the
transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), which is activated through the
canonical and noncanonical pathways in response to various stimuli. NF-κB has
long been regarded as a proatherogenic factor, because it is implicated in
multiple pathological processes during atherogenesis, including foam cell
formation, vascular inflammation, proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells, 
arterial calcification, and plaque progression. In contrast, inhibition of NF-κB 
signaling has been shown to protect against atherosclerosis. This chapter aims to
discuss recent progress on the roles of NF-κB in lipid metabolism and
atherosclerosis and also to highlight its potential therapeutic benefits.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26231484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Herz. 2015 Sep;40(6):837-44. doi: 10.1007/s00059-015-4341-0.

[Coronary atherosclerosis and progression to unstable plaques :
Histomorphological and molecular aspects].

[Article in German]

Wohlschlaeger J(1,)(2), Bertram S(3), Theegarten D(3), Hager T(3), Baba HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinik Essen, Essen, Deutschland.
wohlschlaegerje@diako.de. (2)Institut für Pathologie, Evang.-luth.
Diakonissenanstalt zu Flensburg, Flensburg, Deutschland.
wohlschlaegerje@diako.de. (3)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinik Essen,
Essen, Deutschland.

Atherosclerosis causes clinical symptoms through luminal narrowing by stenosis or
by precipitating thrombi that obstruct blood flow to the myocardium (coronary
artery disease), central nervous system (ischemic stroke) or lower extremities
(peripheral vascular disease). The most common of these manifestations of
atherosclerosis is coronary artery disease, clinically presenting as either
stable angina or acute coronary syndromes. Atherosclerosis is a mainly
lipoprotein-driven disease, which is associated with the formation of
atherosclerotic plaques at specific sites of the vascular system through
inflammation, necrosis, fibrosis and calcification. In most cases, plaque rupture
of a so-called thin-cap fibroatheroma leads to contact of the necrotic core
material of the underlying atherosclerotic plaque with blood, resulting in the
formation of a thrombus with acute occlusion of the affected (coronary) artery.
The atherosclerotic lesions that can cause acute coronary syndromes by formation 
of a thrombotic occlusion encompass (1) thin-cap fibroatheroma, (2) plaque
erosion and (3) so-called calcified nodules in calcified and tortuous arteries of
aged individuals. The underlying pathomechanisms remain incompletely understood
so far. In this review, the mechanisms of atherosclerotic plaque initiation and
progression are discussed.

PMID: 26216542  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2015 Aug 26;22(8):739-49. doi: 10.5551/jat.30460. Epub 2015
Jul 8.

From Lipid Retention to Immune-Mediate Inflammation and Associated Angiogenesis
in the Pathogenesis of Atherosclerosis.

Usman A(1), Ribatti D, Sadat U, Gillard JH.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Radiology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust.

Atherosclerosis is a leading cause of mortality and long-term morbidity
worldwide. It is a lipoprotein-driven disease that leads to plaque formation at
focal areas in the arterial blood vessels through intimal inflammation, necrosis,
fibrosis, and calcification. Adventitial and intimal angiogenesis contributes to 
the progression of intimal hyperplasia and the development of a necrotic core.
The volatile nature of an atheromatous plaque is responsible for approximately
60% of symptomatic carotid artery diseases and about 75% of acute coronary
events. In this review the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is discussed from the 
initial step of lipid retention to advanced stages of immune-mediate inflammation
and associated angiogenesis. Mechanisms of plaque rupture are also discussed.

PMID: 26156748  [PubMed - in process]


34. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2015;10(11):1817-32. doi: 10.2217/nnm.15.26.

Molecular imaging of atherosclerosis with nanoparticle-based fluorinated MRI
contrast agents.

Palekar RU(1), Jallouk AP(2), Lanza GM(1,)(2), Pan H(2), Wickline SA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, Whitaker Hall,
Campus Box 1097, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA. (2)Department of 
Medicine, Washington University, Campus Box 8215, 4320 Forest Park Avenue, St
Louis, MO 63108, USA.

As atherosclerosis remains one of the most prevalent causes of patient mortality,
the ability to diagnose early signs of plaque rupture and thrombosis represents a
significant clinical need. With recent advances in nanotechnology, it is now
possible to image specific molecular processes noninvasively with MRI, using
various types of nanoparticles as contrast agents. In the context of
cardiovascular disease, it is possible to specifically deliver contrast agents to
an epitope of interest for detecting vascular inflammatory processes, which serve
as predecessors to atherosclerotic plaque development. Herein, we review various 
applications of nanotechnology in detecting atherosclerosis using MRI, with an
emphasis on perfluorocarbon nanoparticles and fluorine imaging, along with
theranostic prospects of nanotechnology in cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC4483172 [Available on 2016-04-01]
PMID: 26080701  [PubMed - in process]


35. Cell Immunol. 2015 Sep;297(1):33-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2015.05.007. Epub 2015
May 29.

The paradoxical role of IL-17 in atherosclerosis.

Gong F(1), Liu Z(1), Liu J(1), Zhou P(1), Liu Y(1), Lu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu 210029, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, The Second
Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu 210029, China.
Electronic address: luxiang66@njmu.edu.cn.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease mediated by innate and adaptive
immune responses. In recent years, CD4(+) T cells (Th1, Th2, Treg, and Th17) have
been increasingly studied for their role in atherosclerosis pathophysiology,
atheroma stability, plaque rupture, and life-threatening acute coronary syndrome.
IL-17, a marker cytokine of Th17 cells, has been reported to be involved in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and asthma.
However, its role in atherosclerosis has been poorly characterized. This article 
provides a comprehensive overview of the role of IL-17 in the development of
atherosclerosis and human coronary artery diseases.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26077826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Aug;241(2):443-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.05.019. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Circulating cytokines reflect the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in
atherosclerotic plaques.

Edsfeldt A(1), Grufman H(2), Asciutto G(3), Nitulescu M(2), Persson A(4), Nilsson
M(4), Nilsson J(2), Gonçalves I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit, Clinical Research Center, Clinical 
Sciences, Lund University, Sweden; Dept. of Cardiology, Skåne University
Hospital, Sweden. Electronic address: Andreas.Edsfeldt@med.lu.se. (2)Experimental
Cardiovascular Research Unit, Clinical Research Center, Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Sweden. (3)Vascular Center Malmö, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö,
Sweden. (4)Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit, Clinical Research Center,
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden; Dept. of Cardiology, Skåne University
Hospital, Sweden.

AIMS: Inflammation is a key factor in the development of plaque rupture and acute
cardiovascular events. Although imaging techniques can be used to identify
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques, we are lacking non-invasive methods, such as 
plasma markers of plaque inflammation that could help to identify presence of
vulnerable plaques. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether
increased plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines reflects inflammatory
activity within atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cytokines were measured using Luminex immunoassay in 200
homogenized plaque extracts and plasma, obtained from 197 subjects undergoing
carotid surgery. Plasma levels of macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β),
tumor necrosis factor- α (TNF-α) and fractalkine correlated significantly, not
only with plaque levels of the same cytokines but also with the abundance of
several pro-inflammatory and atherogenic cytokines assessed in plaque tissue.
High plasma levels (upper tertile) of MIP-1β, TNF-α and fractalkine identified
the presence of a plaque with high inflammation (above median of a score based on
the plaque content of MIP-1β, TNF-α, interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and fractalkine) with a
sensitivity between 65 and 67% and a specificity between 78 and 83%. Furthermore,
this study shows that high plasma levels of MIP-1β, TNF-α and fractalkine predict
future transient ischemic attacks.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that the plasma levels of MIP-1β, TNF-α and
fractalkine reflect the levels of several pro-atherogenic cytokines in plaque
tissue and might be possible plasma markers for a vulnerable atherosclerotic
disease. We thereby propose that these cytokines can be used as surrogate markers
for the identification of patients with high-risk plaques.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074318  [PubMed - in process]


37. PLoS One. 2015 May 14;10(5):e0125677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125677.
eCollection 2015.

Identifying Vulnerable Atherosclerotic Plaque in Rabbits Using DMSA-USPIO
Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging to Investigate the Effect of Atorvastatin.

Qi C(1), Deng L(2), Li D(3), Wu W(4), Gong L(4), Li Y(4), Zhang Q(4), Zhang T(5),
Zhang C(5), Zhang Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)General Hospital of Nanjing Military Region, Xuzhou, China; Department of
Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, China. 
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, China.
(3)General Hospital of Nanjing Military Region, Xuzhou, China; Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, China. (4)Department of
Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, China. 
(5)Department of magnetic resonance imaging, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou
Medical College, Xuzhou, China. (6)Laboratory of Molecular and Boimolecular
Electronics, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque is the primary cause of acute
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular syndromes. Early and non-invasive detection of
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques (VP) would be significant in preventing some
aspects of these syndromes. As a new contrast agent, dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA) modified ultra-small super paramagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) was synthesized
and used to identify VP and rupture plaque by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
METHODS: Atherosclerosis was induced in male New Zealand White rabbits by feeding
a high cholesterol diet (n = 30). Group A with atherosclerosis plaque (n = 10)
were controls. VP was established in groups B (n = 10) and C (n = 10) using
balloon-induced endothelial injury of the abdominal aorta. Adenovirus-carrying
p53 genes were injected into the aortic segments rich in plaques after 8 weeks.
Group C was treated with atorvastatin for 8 weeks. Sixteen weeks later, all
rabbits underwent pharmacological triggering, and imaging were taken daily for 5 
d after DMSA-USPIO infusion. At the first day and before being killed, serum
MMP-9, sCD40L, and other lipid indicators were measured.
RESULTS: DMSA-USPIO particles accumulated in VP and rupture plaques. Rupture
plaques appeared as areas of hyper-intensity on DMSA-USPIO enhanced MRI,
especially T2*-weighted sequences, with a signal strength peaking at 96 h. The
group given atorvastatin showed few DMSA-USPIO particles and had lower levels of 
serum indicators. MMP-9 and sCD40L levels in group B were significantly higher
than in the other 2 groups (P <0.05).
CONCLUSION: After successfully establishing a VP model in rabbits, DMSA-USPIO was
used to enhance MRI for clear identification of plaque inflammation and rupture. 
Rupture plaques were detectable in this way probably due to an activating
inflammatory process. Atorvastatin reduced the inflammatory response and
stabilizing VP possibly by decreasing MMP-9 and sCD40L levels.

PMCID: PMC4431872
PMID: 25973795  [PubMed - in process]


38. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:718329. doi: 10.1155/2015/718329. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

Markers of inflammation associated with plaque progression and instability in
patients with carotid atherosclerosis.

Ammirati E(1), Moroni F(2), Norata GD(3), Magnoni M(2), Camici PG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiothoracic Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University, Via Olgettina 58-60, 20132 Milan, Italy ; Cardiovascular
and Thoracic Department, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Cardiothoracic Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University, Via Olgettina 58-60, 20132 Milan, Italy. (3)Departement 
of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy ; Center for the Study of Atherosclerosis, Bassini Hospital,
Cinisello Balsamo, Italy ; Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University, London, UK.

Atherosclerosis is the focal expression of a systemic disease affecting medium-
and large-sized arteries, in which traditional cardiovascular risk factor and
immune factors play a key role. It is well accepted that circulating biomarkers, 
including C-reactive protein and interleukin-6, reliably predict major
cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarction or death. However, the
relevance of biomarkers of systemic inflammation to atherosclerosis progression
in the carotid artery is less established. The large majority of clinical studies
focused on the association between biomarkers and subclinical atherosclerosis,
that is, carotid intima-media thickening (cIMT), which represents an earlier
stage of the disease. The aim of this work is to review inflammatory biomarkers
that were associated with a higher atherosclerotic burden, a faster disease
progression, and features of plaque instability, such as inflammation or
neovascularization, in patients with carotid atherosclerotic plaque, which
represents an advanced stage of disease compared with cIMT. The association of
biomarkers with the occurrence of cerebrovascular events, secondary to carotid
plaque rupture, will also be presented. Currently, the degree of carotid artery
stenosis is used to predict the risk of future cerebrovascular events in patients
affected by carotid atherosclerosis. However, this strategy appears suboptimal.
The identification of suitable biomarkers could provide a useful adjunctive
criterion to ensure better risk stratification and optimize management.

PMCID: PMC4415469
PMID: 25960621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):1665-76. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3668. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Establishment of an interleukin-1β-induced inflammation-activated endothelial
cell-smooth muscle cell-mononuclear cell co-culture model and evaluation of the
anti-inflammatory effects of tanshinone IIA on atherosclerosis.

Li Y(1), Guo Y(1), Chen Y(1), Wang Y(1), You Y(1), Yang Q(1), Weng X(1), Li Q(1),
Zhu X(1), Zhou B(1), Liu X(1), Gong Z(1), Zhang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics of Chinese Materia Medica, Institute of Chinese
Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, P.R.
China.

Increasing evidence supports the hypothesis that inflammatory reactions serves an
important function in the formation, progression and plaque rupture of
atherosclerosis. Interleukin (IL)-1 primarily induces inflammation and is closely
associated with the inflammatory environment and the formation of
atherosclerosis. The present study aimed to establish an in vitro model for the
evaluation of drug efficacy in the intervention of atherosclerosis from the
inflammatory perspective, and to observe the anti-inflammatory effects of
tanshinone IIA and andrographolide on atherosclerosis. The IL-1β-induced
inflammation-activated endothelial cell (EC)-smooth muscle cell (SMC)-mononuclear
cell (MC) co-culture model was established, based on the changes in a series of
atherosclerosis-associated inflammatory markers secreted by ECs and SMCs. The
expression of connexin in ECs, adhesion of MCs and changes in inflammatory
signalling molecules were selected as evaluation indices for the inﬂammatory
microenvironment of atherosclerosis. The use of this model revealed that
tanshinone IIA exhibited significant efficacy against atherosclerosis and its
inflammatory reactions. Inflammatory reactions were regarded as the primary
mechanism underlying atherosclerosis. The established model simulated a series of
relevant changes in the arterial wall under the inflammatory cytokines with
oxidized low-density lipoprotein during the atherosclerotic process. The present 
study presented a reliable method for the identification of drugs with potential 
anti-inflammatory activity in atherosclerosis, for investigating the mechanisms
of action, considering the improvement of the inflammatory state and the increase
in plaque stability observed.

PMCID: PMC4464412
PMID: 25936371  [PubMed - in process]


40. Clin Calcium. 2015 May;25(5):679-86. doi: CliCa1505679686.

[Vascular Calcification - Pathological Mechanism and Clinical Application - . The
significance of arterial calcification in unstable plaques].

[Article in Japanese]

Inaba M(1), Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.

Plaque rupture or erosion with subsequent thrombus formation is the principal
mechanism underlying the sudden onset of acute coronary syndromes. Plaque
inflammation and increased oxidative stress play important roles in the
pathogenesis of plaque destabilization. Macrophages, T lymphocytes, and
neutrophils are the dominant types of inflammatory cells at human coronary
unstable plaques, such as ruptured plaques or eroded plaques. Calcification is a 
common finding in human atherosclerotic lesions, and arterial calcification is
generally classified into calcification within an atherosclerotic plaque, and
Mönckeberg's medial calcific sclerosis characterized by calcific deposits within 
the media of small and medium-sized muscular arteries. It has been reported that 
a spotty pattern of calcification is associated with coronary unstable ruptured
plaques in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Patients undergoing
hemodialysis (HD) have a high prevalence of arterial calcification and
cardiovascular events. We recently demonstrated that plasma oxidized low density 
lipoprotein (LDL) levels significantly increased after a single HD session. This 
HD session-related increase in plasma oxidized LDL levels could contribute to the
progression and acceleration of atherosclerosis and arterial calcification,
leading to the development of cardiovascular events in HD patients.

PMID: 25926571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Nucl Med. 2015 Jun;56(6):939-44. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.155176. Epub 2015 Apr 
23.

64Cu-Labeled Divalent Cystine Knot Peptide for Imaging Carotid Atherosclerotic
Plaques.

Jiang L(1), Tu Y(2), Kimura RH(2), Habte F(2), Chen H(3), Cheng K(2), Shi H(4),
Gambhir SS(2), Cheng Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China; and Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Department of 
Radiology and Bio-X Program, Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early
Detection, Stanford University, Stanford, California. (2)Molecular Imaging
Program at Stanford (MIPS), Department of Radiology and Bio-X Program, Canary
Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection, Stanford University, Stanford,
California. (3)Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Department of
Radiology and Bio-X Program, Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early
Detection, Stanford University, Stanford, California zcheng@stanford.edu.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China; and.

The rupture of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques that lead to stroke and
myocardial infarction may be induced by macrophage infiltration and augmented by 
the expression of integrin αvβ3. Indeed, atherosclerotic angiogenesis may be a
promising marker of inflammation. In this study, an engineered integrin
αvβ3-targeting PET probe, (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A, derived from a divalent knottin
miniprotein was evaluated in a mouse model for carotid atherosclerotic
plaques.METHODS: Atherosclerotic plaques in BALB/C mice, maintained on a high-fat
diet, were induced with streptozotocin injection and carotid artery ligation and 
verified by MR imaging. Knottin 3-4A was synthesized by solid-phase peptide
synthesis chemistry and coupled to 1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid
(NOTA) before radiolabeling with (64)Cu. PET probe stability in mouse serum was
evaluated. Mice with carotid atherosclerotic plaques were injected via the tail
vein with (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A or (18)F-FDG, followed by small-animal PET/CT imaging 
at different time points. Receptor targeting specificity of the probe was
verified by coinjection of c(RGDyK) administered in molar excess. Subsequently,
carotid artery dissection and immunofluorescence staining were performed to
evaluate target expression.
RESULTS: (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A was synthesized in high radiochemical purity and yield 
and demonstrated molecular stability in both phosphate-buffered saline and mouse 
serum at 4 h. Small-animal PET/CT showed that (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A accumulated at
significantly higher levels in the neovasculature of carotid atherosclerotic
plaques (7.41 ± 1.44 vs. 0.67 ± 0.23 percentage injected dose/gram, P < 0.05)
than healthy or normal vessels at 1 h after injection. (18)F-FDG also accumulated
in atherosclerotic lesions at 0.5 and 1 h after injection but at lower
plaque-to-normal tissue ratios than (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A. For example,
plaque-to-normal carotid artery ratios for (18)F-FDG and (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A at 1 h 
after injection were 3.75 and 14.71 (P < 0.05), respectively. Furthermore, uptake
of (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A in atherosclerotic plaques was effectively blocked (∼90% at 1
h after injection) by coinjection of c(RGDyK). Immunostaining confirmed integrin 
αvβ3 expression in both the infiltrating macrophages and the neovasculature of
atherosclerotic plaques.
CONCLUSION: (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A demonstrates specific accumulation in carotid
atherosclerotic plaques in which macrophage infiltration and angiogenesis are
responsible for elevated integrin αvβ3 levels. Therefore, (64)Cu-NOTA-3-4A may
demonstrate clinical utility as a PET probe for atherosclerosis imaging or for
the evaluation of therapies used to treat atherosclerosis.

© 2015 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

PMID: 25908832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cardiovasc Ther. 2015 Jun;33(3):118-26. doi: 10.1111/1755-5922.12119.

Plaque Thrombosis is Reduced by Attenuating Plaque Inflammation with Pioglitazone
and is Evaluated by Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography.

Zhang MD(1,)(2), Zhao XC(1,)(2), Zhang YH(1,)(2), Yan YF(1,)(2), Wang ZM(3), Lv
SZ(1,)(2), Zhao QM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China. (2)Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood Vessel Diseases,
Beijing, China. (3)Center for PET/CT, General Hospital of Second Artillery of
PLA, Beijing, China.

INTRODUCTION: The relationship between the beneficial effects of pioglitazone in 
reducing clinical events and plaque inflammatory burden remains unknown. This
study aimed to determine whether pioglitazone can reduce the number of plaque
thrombosis incidences and whether decreasing plaque inflammation is the mechanism
by which pioglitazone reduces plaque thromboses.
METHODS AND RESULTS: therosclerotic rabbits were divided into two groups: the
atherosclerosis group (n = 13) and pioglitazone group (n = 10). The rabbits
underwent pharmacological triggering to induce thrombosis. Serum inflammatory
markers, FDG uptake, macrophage, and neovessel staining detected arterial
inflammation. PET/CT scans were performed twice (baseline and posttreatment
scans). Plaque area, macrophages, and neovessels were measured and the histologic
sections were matched with the PET/CT scans. Serum MMP-9 and hsCRP were lower in 
the pioglitazone group compared to the atherosclerosis group. The SUVmean
significantly decreased in the pioglitazone group (0.62 ± 0.21 vs. 0.55 ± 0.19, P
= 0.008), but increased in the atherosclerosis group (0.61 ± 0.15 vs. 0.91 ±
0.20, P < 0.000). The incidence rate of plaque rupture, plaque area, macrophage
density, and neovessel density was significantly lower in rabbits with
pioglitazone than without (15% vs. 38%, P < 0.001; 18.00 ± 2.30 vs. 27.00 ± 1.60;
P < 0.001; 8.80 ± 3.94 vs. 28.26 ± 2.49; P < 0.001; 16.50 ± 3.09 vs. 29.00 ±
2.11; P < 0.001, respectively). Moreover, plaque area and macrophage density were
positively correlated with SUV values.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that pioglitazone can reduce the number of plaque
thrombosis incidences by decreasing plaque inflammation. (18)F-FDG-PET/CT can
detect plaque inflammation and assess the effects of antiatherosclerotic drugs.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25825053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015 Mar 26;4(4). pii: e001403. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001403.

A change in inflammatory footprint precedes plaque instability: a systematic
evaluation of cellular aspects of the adaptive immune response in human
atherosclerosis.

van Dijk RA(1), Duinisveld AJ(1), Schaapherder AF(2), Mulder-Stapel A(1), Hamming
JF(1), Kuiper J(3), de Boer OJ(4), van der Wal AC(4), Kolodgie FD(5), Virmani
R(5), Lindeman JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands (D., D., M.S., H., L.). (2)Department of Transplantation Surgery,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands (S.). (3)Gorlaeus
Laboratories, Division of Biopharmaceutics, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug
Research, Leiden, The Netherlands (K.). (4)Department of Pathology, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (B., W.). (5)CVPath Institute Inc.,
Gaithersburg, MD (K., V.).

Comment in
    J Am Heart Assoc. 2015 Apr;4(4). pii: e001909. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.115.001909.

BACKGROUND: Experimental studies characterize adaptive immune response as a
critical factor in the progression and complications of atherosclerosis. Yet, it 
is unclear whether these observations translate to the human situation. This
study systematically evaluates cellular components of the adaptive immune
response in a biobank of human aortas covering the full spectrum of
atherosclerotic disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A systematic analysis was performed on 114
well-characterized perirenal aortic specimens with immunostaining for T-cell
subsets (CD3/4/8/45RA/45RO/FoxP3) and the Th1/non-Th1/Th17 ratio
(CD4(+)T-bet(+)/CD4(+)T-bet(-)/CD4(+)/interleukin-17(+) double staining). CD20
and CD138 were used to identify B cells and plasma cells, while B-cell maturation
was evaluated by AID/CD21 staining and expression of lymphoid homeostatic CXCL13.
Scattered CD4 and CD8 cells with a T memory subtype were found in normal aorta
and early, nonprogressive lesions. The total number of T cells increases in
progressive atherosclerotic lesions (≈1:5 CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio). A further
increase in medial and adventitial T cells is found upon progression to
vulnerable lesions.This critical stage is further hallmarked by de novo formation
of adventitial lymphoidlike structures containing B cells and plasma cells, a
process accompanied by transient expression of CXCL13. A dramatic reduction of
T-cell subsets, disappearance of lymphoid structures, and loss of CXCL13
expression characterize postruptured lesions. FoxP3 and Th17 T cells were
minimally present throughout the atherosclerotic process.
CONCLUSIONS: Transient CXCL13 expression, restricted presence of B cells in human
atherosclerosis, along with formation of nonfunctional extranodal lymphoid
structures in the phase preceding plaque rupture, indicates a "critical" change
in the inflammatory footprint before and during plaque destabilization.

© 2015 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4579929
PMID: 25814626  [PubMed - in process]


44. Curr Drug Targets. 2015;16(4):373-82.

Macrophages and dendritic cells: the usual suspects in atherogenesis.

Kassiteridi C, Monaco C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, NDORMS, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7FY, UK. Claudia.monaco@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

Atherosclerosis, the major risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) and the
leading cause of death worldwide, is a multifactorial chronic inflammatory
disease, which, clinically manifests from early lipid-rich lesions to plaque
rupture and/or thrombosis in the arterial wall. The myeloid cell compartment,
including macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), is long known to contribute to
the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. However their complex
phenotypic heterogeneity hampers our full understanding of their role. Here, we
review the biological and functional versatility of the myeloid cells in
atherosclerosis. Several distinct subsets of macrophages and myeloid cells have
been identified in atherosclerotic plaques, including subsets that are specific
to atherosclerosis itself. Our ability to target them therapeutically is still
limited. The challenge for the future will be the definition of treatments that
target specific myeloid subsets to prevent the activation of pro-atherogenic
myeloid cell subsets while preserving the anti-atherogenic and repairable
function of myeloid cells.

PMID: 25808566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neuroscience. 2015 Jun 4;295:11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.023. Epub
2015 Mar 19.

Fibrillin-1 impairment enhances blood-brain barrier permeability and xanthoma
formation in brains of apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.

Van der Donckt C(1), Roth L(1), Vanhoutte G(2), Blockx I(2), Bink DI(3), Ritz
K(3), Pintelon I(4), Timmermans JP(4), Bauters D(5), Martinet W(1), Daemen MJ(3),
Verhoye M(2), De Meyer GR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiopharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1,
2610 Antwerp, Belgium. (2)Bio-Imaging Lab, University of Antwerp,
Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium. (3)Department of Pathology M2-206,
Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Laboratory of Cell Biology
and Histology, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp,
Belgium. (5)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, UZ Herestraat 49 - bus 911, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (6)Laboratory of
Physiopharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp,
Belgium. Electronic address: guido.demeyer@uantwerpen.be.

We recently reported that apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient mice with a mutation 
in the fibrillin-1 gene (ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-)) develop accelerated
atherosclerosis with enhanced inflammation, atherosclerotic plaque rupture,
myocardial infarction and sudden death. In the brain, fibrillin-1 functions as an
attachment protein in the basement membrane, providing structural support to the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB). Here, we investigated whether fibrillin-1 impairment
affects the permeability of the BBB proper and the blood-cerebrospinal fluid
barrier (BCSFB), and whether this leads to the accelerated accumulation of lipids
(xanthomas) in the brain. ApoE(-/-) (n=61) and ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-) (n=73)
mice were fed a Western-type diet (WD). After 14 weeks WD, a significantly higher
permeability of the BBB was observed in ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-) mice compared to
age-matched ApoE(-/-) mice. This was accompanied by leukocyte infiltration,
enhanced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases and 
transforming growth factor-β, and by decreased expression of tight junction
proteins claudin-5 and occludin. After 20 weeks WD, 83% of
ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-) mice showed xanthomas in the brain, compared to 23% of
their ApoE(-/-) littermates. Xanthomas were mainly located in fibrillin-1-rich
regions, such as the choroid plexus and the neocortex. Our findings demonstrate
that dysfunctional fibrillin-1 impairs BBB/BCSFB integrity, facilitating
peripheral leukocyte infiltration, which further degrades the BBB/BCSFB. As a
consequence, lipoproteins can enter the brain, resulting in accelerated formation
of xanthomas.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25797463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 18;6:6614. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7614.

RGS1 regulates myeloid cell accumulation in atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysm
rupture through altered chemokine signalling.

Patel J(1), McNeill E(1), Douglas G(1), Hale AB(1), de Bono J(1), Lee R(1), Iqbal
AJ(2), Regan-Komito D(2), Stylianou E(3), Greaves DR(2), Channon KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3
9DU, UK [2] Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (2)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK. (3)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
7DQ, UK.

Chemokine signalling drives monocyte recruitment in atherosclerosis and aortic
aneurysms. The mechanisms that lead to retention and accumulation of macrophages 
in the vascular wall remain unclear. Regulator of G-Protein Signalling-1 (RGS1)
deactivates G-protein signalling, reducing the response to sustained chemokine
stimulation. Here we show that Rgs1 is upregulated in atherosclerotic plaque and 
aortic aneurysms. Rgs1 reduces macrophage chemotaxis and desensitizes chemokine
receptor signalling. In early atherosclerotic lesions, Rgs1 regulates macrophage 
accumulation and is required for the formation and rupture of Angiotensin
II-induced aortic aneurysms, through effects on leukocyte retention.
Collectively, these data reveal a role for Rgs1 in leukocyte trafficking and
vascular inflammation and identify Rgs1, and inhibition of chemokine receptor
signalling as potential therapeutic targets in vascular disease.

PMCID: PMC4374153
PMID: 25782711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Trends Mol Med. 2015 May;21(5):307-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.02.003. Epub
2015 Mar 11.

miRNAs in atherosclerotic plaque initiation, progression, and rupture.

Andreou I(1), Sun X(2), Stone PH(2), Edelman ER(1), Feinberg MW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Institute for Medical Engineering and Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
mfeinberg@partners.org.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic immune-inflammatory disorder that integrates
multiple cell types and a diverse set of inflammatory mediators. miRNAs are
emerging as important post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression in most,
if not all, vertebrate cells, and constitute central players in many
physiological and pathological processes. Rapidly accumulating experimental
studies reveal their key role in cellular and molecular processes related to the 
development of atherosclerosis. We review current evidence for the involvement of
miRNAs in early atherosclerotic lesion formation and in plaque rupture and
erosion. We conclude with a perspective on the clinical relevance, therapeutic
opportunities, and future challenges of miRNA biology in understanding the
pathogenesis of this complex disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4424146 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25771097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Aging Cell. 2015 Aug;14(4):569-81. doi: 10.1111/acel.12322. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Relation between TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway activation by 27-hydroxycholesterol
and 4-hydroxynonenal, and atherosclerotic plaque instability.

Gargiulo S(1), Gamba P(1), Testa G(1), Rossin D(1), Biasi F(1), Poli G(1),
Leonarduzzi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, School of Medicine, University
of Turin, Orbassano, Turin, Italy.

It is now thought that atherosclerosis, although due to increased plasma lipids, 
is mainly the consequence of a complicated inflammatory process, with immune
responses at the different stages of plaque development. Increasing evidence
points to a significant role of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), a key player in
innate immunity, in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. This study aimed to
determine the effects on TLR4 activation of two reactive oxidized lipids carried 
by oxidized low-density lipoproteins, the oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OH)
and the aldehyde 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), both of which accumulate in
atherosclerotic plaques and play a key role in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis. Secondarily, it examined their potential involvement in
mediating inflammation and extracellular matrix degradation, the hallmarks of
high-risk atherosclerotic unstable plaques. In human promonocytic U937 cells,
both 27-OH and HNE were found to enhance cell release of IL-8, IL-1β, and TNF-α
and to upregulate matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) via TLR4/NF-κB-dependent
pathway; these actions may sustain the inflammatory response and matrix
degradation that lead to atherosclerotic plaque instability and to their rupture.
Using specific antibodies, it was also demonstrated that these inflammatory
cytokines increase MMP-9 upregulation, thus enhancing the release of this
matrix-degrading enzyme by macrophage cells and contributing to plaque
instability. These innovative results suggest that, by accumulating in
atherosclerotic plaques, the two oxidized lipids may contribute to plaque
instability and rupture. They appear to do so by sustaining the release of
inflammatory molecules and MMP-9 by inflammatory and immune cells, for example,
macrophages, through activation of TLR4 and its NF-κB downstream signaling.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4531071
PMID: 25757594  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Nucl Cardiol. 2015 Dec;22(6):1179-86. doi: 10.1007/s12350-014-0061-8. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

Feasibility of [18F]-RGD for ex vivo imaging of atherosclerosis in detection of
αvβ3 integrin expression.

Golestani R(1,)(2), Mirfeizi L(3), Zeebregts CJ(4), Westra J(5), de Haas HJ(3),
Glaudemans AW(3), Koole M(3), Luurtsema G(3), Tio RA(6), Dierckx RA(3,)(7),
Boersma HH(3,)(8), Elsinga PH(3), Slart RH(3,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. Box 30001, 9700 RB,
Groningen, The Netherlands. reza.golestani@yale.edu. (2)Cardiovascular Medicine
Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
reza.golestani@yale.edu. (3)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. 
Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Division of Vascular Surgery, 
Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Clinical Immunology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (6)Department of Cardiology, Thorax Center, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Department of Clinical and Hospital Pharmacy, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (9)Faculty of
Science and Technology, Biomedical Photonic Imaging, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Nucl Cardiol. 2015 Dec;22(6):1187-90.
    J Nucl Cardiol. 2015 Dec;22(6):1191-4.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation and angiogenesis play an important role in
atherosclerotic plaque rupture. Therefore, molecular imaging of these processes
could be used for determination of rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques. αvβ3
integrin is involved in the process of angiogenesis. Targeted imaging of αvβ3
integrin has been shown to be possible in previous studies on tumor models, using
radiolabeled arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD). Our aim was to investigate
feasibility of ex vivo detection of αvβ3 integrin in carotid endarterectomy (CEA)
specimens.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nineteen CEA specimens were incubated in 5 MBq [18F]-RGD-K5 
for 1 hour followed by 1 hour emission microPET scan. The results were quantified
in 4 mm wide segments as percent incubation dose per gram (%Inc/g).
Segmental-to-total ratio was calculated and presence of αvβ3 integrin and
endothelial cells in each segment was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining
for CD31 and αvβ3 integrin, respectively. [18F]-RGD-K5 uptake was heterogeneously
distributed across CEA specimens and was localized within the vessel wall.
Significant correlations were observed between segmental-to-total ratio with αvβ3
integrin staining score (r = 0.58, P = .038) and CD31 staining score (ρ = 0.67,
P < .002).
CONCLUSION: This study showed the feasibility of integrin imaging by
determination of αvβ3 integrin expression in human atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 25698472  [PubMed - in process]


50. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Apr;239(2):459-64. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.01.029. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

A score including ADAM17 substrates correlates to recurring cardiovascular event 
in subjects with atherosclerosis.

Rizza S(1), Copetti M(2), Cardellini M(1), Menghini R(3), Pecchioli C(1), Luzi
A(1), Di Cola G(1), Porzio O(4), Ippoliti A(5), Romeo F(3), Pellegrini F(2),
Federici M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy;
Center for Atherosclerosis, Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. (2)Unit of
Biostatistics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imaging,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy. (6)Department of Systems Medicine,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; Center for Atherosclerosis,
Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: federicm@uniroma2.it.

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2015 May;240(1):1-2.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis disease is a leading cause for mortality and
morbidity. The narrowing/rupture of a vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque is
accountable for acute cardiovascular events. However, despite of an intensive
research, a reliable clinical method which may disclose a vulnerable patient is
still unavailable.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We tested the association of ADAM17 (A Disintegrin and
Metallo Protease Domain 17) circulating substrates (sICAM-1, sVCAM-1, sIL6R and
sTNFR1) with a second major cardiovascular events [MACEs] (cardiovascular death, 
peripheral artery surgeries, non-fatal myocardial infarction and non-fatal
stroke) in 298 patients belonging to the Vascular Diabetes (AVD) study. To
evaluate ADAM17 activity we create ADAM17 score through a RECPAM model. Finally
we tested the discrimination ability and the reclassification of clinical models.
At follow-up (mean 47 months, range 1-118 months), 55 MACEs occurred (14 nonfatal
MI, 14 nonfatal strokes, 17 peripheral artery procedures and 10 cardiovascular
deaths) (incidence = 7.8% person-years). An increased risk for incident events
was observed among the high ADAM17 score individuals both in univariable (HR
19.20, 95% CI 15.82-63.36, p < 0.001) and multivariable analysis (HR 3.42, 95% CI
1.55-7.54, p < 0.001). Finally we found that ADAM17 score significantly increases
the prediction accuracy of the Framingham Recurring-Coronary-Heart-Disease-Score,
with a significant improvement in discrimination (integrated discrimination
improvement = 9%, p = 0.012) and correctly reclassifying 10% of events and 41% of
non-events resulting in a cNRI = 0.51 (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated a positive role of ADAM17 activity to predicting CV
events. We think that an approach that targets strategies beyond classic
cardiovascular risk factors control is necessary in individuals with an
established vascular atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Matrix Biol. 2015 May-Jul;44-46:157-66. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2015.01.015. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Metalloproteinases promote plaque rupture and myocardial infarction: A persuasive
concept waiting for clinical translation.

Newby AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bristol, School of Clinical Sciences and Bristol Heart
Institute, Bristol, UK. Electronic address: a.newby@bris.ac.uk.

Atherosclerotic plaque rupture provokes most myocardial infarctions. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) have counteracting roles in intimal thickening, which
stabilizes plaques, on the one hand and extracellular matrix destruction that
leads to plaque rupture on the other. This review briefly summarizes the key
points supporting the involvement of individual MMPs in provoking plaque rupture 
and discusses the barriers that stand in the way of clinical translation, which
can be itemised as follows: structural and functional complexity of the MMP
family; lack of adequate preclinical models partly owing to different expression 
patterns of MMPs and TIMPs in mouse and human macrophages; the need to target
individual MMPs selectively; the difficulties in establishing causality in human 
studies; and the requirement for surrogate markers of efficacy. Overcoming these 
barriers would open the way to new treatments that could have a major impact on
cardiovascular mortality worldwide.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25636537  [PubMed - in process]


52. Hamostaseologie. 2015;35(3):252-62. doi: 10.5482/HAMO-14-11-0061. Epub 2015 Jan
30.

MRI, the technology for imaging of thrombi and inflammation.

von Zur Muhlen C(1), Bode C.

Author information: 
(1)Constantin von zur Mühlen, MD, University Heart Center Freiburg, Hugstetter
Straße 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany, Tel.+49/(0)761/27 03-78 35; Fax -38 84,
E-mail: constantin.vonzurmuehlen@universitaets-herzzentrum.de.

Atherosclerosis and its sequelae have a major impact on morbidity and mortality. 
The rupture of an inflamed atherosclerotic plaque is a crucial event, since it
can result in acute thrombotic closure of an arterial vessel, resulting e. g. in 
myocardial infarction or stroke. Not only detection of early plaque rupture with 
imminent closure is therefore of clinical interest, but also timely detection of 
vascular inflammation and atherosclerotic plaque progression. However, plaque
inflammation or even plaque rupture without vessel occlusion is not reliably
detectable by current imaging techniques. Coronary angiography is the gold
standard for evaluation of the coronary vessels, but only allows visualization of
the vessel lumen without characterizing the important pathophysiology of the
vessel wall. Therefore, highly inflamed and rupture prone plaques can be missed, 
or appear as a minor vessel narrowing. Although currently available techniques
such as intravascular ultrasound or optical coherence tomography allow a further 
characterization of atherosclerotic plaques, it would be desirable to detect
plaque inflammation, early plaque rupture or vascular thrombosis by non-invasive 
techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), since they could allow early
identification of patients at risk or triage of symptomatic patients. In this
manuscript, different strategies for detection of vascular inflammation,
plaque-rupture and thrombosis by MRI will be discussed, with a special focus on
molecular imaging contrast agents.

PMID: 25634650  [PubMed - in process]


53. Future Cardiol. 2015;11(1):115-31. doi: 10.2217/fca.14.55.

PET imaging of atherosclerosis.

Tarkin JM(1), Joshi FR, Rajani NK, Rudd JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Box 110,
Addenbrooke's Centre for Clinical Investigation, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ,
UK.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic, progressive, multifocal disease of the arterial
wall, which is mainly fuelled by local and systemic inflammation, often resulting
in acute ischemic events following plaque rupture and vessel occlusion. When
assessing the cardiovascular risk of an individual patient, we must consider both
global measures of disease activity and local features of plaque vulnerability,
in addition to anatomical distribution and degree of established atherosclerosis.
These parameters cannot be measured with conventional anatomical imaging
techniques alone, which are designed primarily to identify the presence of
organic intraluminal obstruction in symptomatic patients. However, molecular
imaging with PET, using specifically targeted radiolabeled probes to track active
in vivo atherosclerotic mechanisms noninvasively, may potentially provide a
method that is better suited for this purpose. Vascular PET imaging can help us
to further understand aspects of plaque biology, and current evidence supports a 
future role as an emerging clinical tool for the quantification of cardiovascular
risk in order to guide and monitor responses to antiatherosclerosis treatments
and to distinguish high-risk plaques.

PMID: 25606707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar;45(3):274-87. doi: 10.1111/eci.12401. Epub 2015 Jan
28.

Update on the role of angiotensin in the pathophysiology of coronary
atherothrombosis.

da Silva AR(1), Fraga-Silva RA, Stergiopulos N, Montecucco F, Mach F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Foundation for Medical Researches, Department of
Medical Specialties, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Coronary atherothrombosis due to atherosclerotic plaque rupture or
erosion is frequently associated with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Significant
efforts have been made to elucidate the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying 
acute coronary events.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This narrative review is based on the material searched
for and obtained via PubMed up to August 2014. The search terms we used were as
follows: 'angiotensin, acute coronary syndromes, acute myocardial infarction' in 
combination with 'atherosclerosis, vulnerability, clinical trial, ACE inhibitors,
inflammation'.
RESULTS: Among several regulatory components, the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) 
was shown as a key pathway modulating coronary atherosclerotic plaque
vulnerability. Indeed, these molecules are involved in all stages of
atherogenesis. Classically, the RAS is composed by a series of enzymatic
reactions leading to the angiotensin (Ang) II generation and activity. However,
the knowledge of RAS has expanded and become more complex. The discovery of novel
components and their functions has revealed additional pathways that contribute
to or counterbalance the actions of Ang II. In this review, we discussed on
recent findings concerning the role of different angiotensin peptides in the
pathophysiology of ACS and coronary atherothrombosis, exploring the link between 
these molecules and atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatments selectively targeting angiotensins (including Mas and AT2
agonists, ACE2 recombinant, or Ang-(1-7) and almandine in oral formulations) have
been tested in animal studies or in small human subgroups, expanding the
perspective in the ACS prevention. These novel strategies, especially in the
counter-regulatory axis ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/Mas, might be promising to reduce plaque
vulnerability and inflammation.

© 2015 Stichting European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

PMID: 25586671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Feb;238(2):220-30. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.12.011. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

The dark and bright side of atherosclerotic calcification.

Pugliese G(1), Iacobini C(2), Blasetti Fantauzzi C(3), Menini S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, Via
di Grottarossa, 1035-1039, 00189 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
giuseppe.pugliese@uniroma1.it. (2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, 
"La Sapienza" University, Via di Grottarossa, 1035-1039, 00189 Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: carla.iacobini@virgilio.it. (3)Department of Clinical and
Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, Via di Grottarossa, 1035-1039,
00189 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: claudia_b_f@yahoo.it. (4)Department of
Clinical and Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, Via di Grottarossa,
1035-1039, 00189 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: meninistefano@uniroma1.it.

Vascular calcification is an unfavorable event in the natural history of
atherosclerosis that predicts cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. However,
increasing evidence suggests that different calcification patterns are associated
with different or even opposite histopathological and clinical features,
reflecting the dual relationship between inflammation and calcification. In fact,
initial calcium deposition in response to pro-inflammatory stimuli results in the
formation of spotty or granular calcification ("microcalcification"), which
induces further inflammation. This vicious cycle favors plaque rupture, unless an
adaptive response prevails, with blunting of inflammation and survival of
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). VSMCs promote fibrosis and also undergo
osteogenic transdifferentiation, with formation of homogeneous or sheet-like
calcification ("macrocalcification"), that stabilizes the plaque by serving as a 
barrier towards inflammation. Unfortunately, little is known about the molecular 
mechanisms regulating this adaptive response. The advanced glycation/lipoxidation
endproducts (AGEs/ALEs) have been shown to promote vascular calcification and
atherosclerosis. Recent evidence suggests that two AGE/ALE receptors, RAGE and
galectin-3, modulate in divergent ways, not only inflammation, but also vascular 
osteogenesis, by favoring "microcalcification" and "macrocalcification",
respectively. Galectin-3 seems essential for VSMC transdifferentiation into
osteoblast-like cells via direct modulation of the WNT-β-catenin signaling, thus 
driving formation of "macrocalcification", whereas RAGE favors deposition of
"microcalcification" by promoting and perpetuating inflammation and by
counteracting the osteoblastogenic effect of galectin-3. Further studies are
required to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating transition from
"microcalcification" to "macrocalcification", thus allowing to design therapeutic
strategies which favor this adaptive process, in order to limit the adverse
effects of established atherosclerotic calcification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Dec;3(6):e001232. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001232.

Anti-inflammatory immune skewing is atheroprotective: Apoe−/−FcγRIIb−/− mice
develop fibrous carotid plaques.

Harmon EY(1), Fronhofer V 3rd, Keller RS, Feustel PJ, Zhu X, Xu H, Avram D, Jones
DM, Nagarajan S, Lennartz MR.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, 
NY

BACKGROUND: Stroke, caused by carotid plaque rupture, is a major cause of death
in the United States. Whereas vulnerable human plaques have higher Fc receptor
(FcγR) expression than their stable counterparts, how FcγR expression impacts
plaque histology is unknown. We investigated the role of FcγRIIb in carotid
plaque development and stability in apolipoprotein (Apo)e−/− and
Apoe−/−FcγRIIb−/− double knockout (DKO) animals.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plaques were induced by implantation of a shear
stress‐modifying cast around the carotid artery. Plaque length and stenosis were 
followed longitudinally using ultrasound biomicroscopy. Immune status was
determined by flow cytometry, cytokine release, immunoglobulin G concentration
and analysis of macrophage polarization both in plaques and in vitro.
Surprisingly, DKO animals had lower plaque burden in both carotid artery and
descending aorta. Plaques from Apoe−/− mice were foam‐cell rich and resembled
vulnerable human specimens, whereas those from DKO mice were fibrous and
histologically stable. Plaques from DKO animals expressed higher arginase 1
(Arg‐1) and lower inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), indicating the presence
of M2 macrophages. Analysis of blood and cervical lymph nodes revealed higher
interleukin (IL)‐10, immune complexes, and regulatory T cells (Tregs) and lower
IL‐12, IL‐1β, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF‐α) in DKO mice. Similarly, in 
vitro stimulation produced higher IL‐10 and Arg‐1 and lower iNOS, IL‐1β, and
TNF‐α in DKO versus Apoe−/− macrophages. These results define a systemic
anti‐inflammatory phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesized that removal of FcγRIIb would exacerbate
atherosclerosis and generate unstable plaques. However, we found that deletion of
FcγRIIb on a congenic C57BL/6 background induces an anti‐inflammatory Treg/M2
polarization that is atheroprotective.

PMCID: PMC4338708
PMID: 25516435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015 Mar;213(3):539-53. doi: 10.1111/apha.12438. Epub 2015
Jan 2.

Contribution of neovascularization and intraplaque haemorrhage to atherosclerotic
plaque progression and instability.

Chistiakov DA(1), Orekhov AN, Bobryshev YV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nanobiotechnology, Pirogov Russian State Medical
University, Moscow, Russia; The Mount Sinai Community Clinical Oncology Program, 
Mount Sinai Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach,
FL, USA; Research Center for Children's Health, Moscow, Russia.

Atherosclerosis is a continuous pathological process that starts early in life
and progresses frequently to unstable plaques. Plaque rupture leads to
deleterious consequences such as acute coronary syndrome, stroke and
atherothrombosis. The vulnerable lesion has several structural and functional
hallmarks that distinguish it from the stable plaque. The unstable plaque has
large necrotic core (over 40% plaque volume) composed of cholesterol crystals,
cholesterol esters, oxidized lipids, fibrin, erythrocytes and their remnants
(haeme, iron, haemoglobin), and dying macrophages. The fibrous cap is thin,
depleted of smooth muscle cells and collagen, and is infiltrated with
proinflammatory cells. In unstable lesion, formation of neomicrovessels is
increased. These neovessels have weak integrity and leak thereby leading to
recurrent haemorrhages. Haemorrhages deliver erythrocytes to the necrotic core
where they degrade promoting inflammation and oxidative stress. Inflammatory
cells mostly presented by monocytes/macrophages, neutrophils and mast cells
extravagate from bleeding neovessels and infiltrate adventitia where they support
chronic inflammation. Plaque destabilization is an evolutionary process that
could start at early atherosclerotic stages and whose progression is influenced
by many factors including neovascularization, intraplaque haemorrhages, formation
of cholesterol crystals, inflammation, oxidative stress and intraplaque protease 
activity.

© 2014 Scandinavian Physiological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25515699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gerontology. 2015;61(5):416-26. doi: 10.1159/000368576. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

The Effect of Ageing on Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Behaviour--A Mini-Review.

Monk BA(1), George SJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Ageing is a prominent risk factor for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are an integral part of atherosclerotic
plaque formation, progression and subsequent rupture. Emerging evidence suggests 
that VSMC behaviour is modified by age, which in turn may affect disease outcome 
in the elderly. In this review, we discuss the effect of age on VSMC behaviour,
proliferation, migration, apoptosis, inflammation, extracellular matrix synthesis
and calcification. In addition, we discuss the multiple signalling factors
underlying these behavioural changes including angiotensin-II, matrix
metalloproteinases, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, and transforming growth
factor-β1. Understanding the molecular processes underpinning altered VSMC
behaviour with age, may lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets
for suppressing atherosclerosis in the elderly population.

PMID: 25471382  [PubMed - in process]


59. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Dec;237(2):514-20. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.09.033. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

MicroRNA-223 inhibits tissue factor expression in vascular endothelial cells.

Li S(1), Chen H(2), Ren J(1), Geng Q(1), Song J(1), Lee C(1), Cao C(1), Zhang
J(1), Xu N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Peking University People's Hospital, No 11. Xizhimen
South Street, Xicheng District, Beijing 100044, China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Peking University People's Hospital, No 11. Xizhimen South Street,
Xicheng District, Beijing 100044, China. Electronic address:
chenhongbj@medmail.com.cn. (3)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory process, in which vascular
endothelial cells (ECs) become dysfunctional owing to the effects of chemical
substances, such as inflammatory factor and growth factors. Tissue factor (TF)
expression is induced by the above chemical substances in activated ECs. TF
initiates thrombosis on disrupted atherosclerotic plaques which plays an
essential role during the onset of acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Increasing
evidences suggest the important role of microRNAs as epigenetic regulators of
atherosclerotic disease. The aim of our study is to identify if microRNA-223
(miR-223) targets TF in ECs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Bioinformatic analysis showed that TF is a target candidate 
of miR-223. Western blotting analysis revealed that tumor necrosis factor α
(TNF-α) increased TF expression in aorta of C57BL/6J mice and cultured ECs
(EA.hy926 cells and HUVEC) after 4 h treatment. In TNF-α treated ECs, TF mRNA was
also increased measured by real-time PCR. Real-time PCR results showed that
miR-223 levels were downregulated in TNF-α-treated aorta of C57BL/6J mice and
cultured ECs. Transfection of ECs with miR-223 mimic or miR-223 inhibitor
modified TF expression both in mRNA and protein levels. Luciferase assays
confirmed that miR-223 suppressed TF expression by binding to the sequence of TF 
3'-untranslated regions (3'UTR). TF procoagulant activity was inhibited by
overexpressing miR-223 with or without TNF-α stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-223-mediated suppression of TF expression provides a novel
molecular mechanism for the regulation of coagulation cascade, and suggests a
clue against thrombogenesis during the process of atherosclerotic plaque rupture.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Vasc Surg. 2015 Feb;61(2):374-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.113. Epub 2014 Oct
31.

Identification of a potential proinflammatory genetic profile influencing carotid
plaque vulnerability.

Biscetti F(1), Straface G(2), Bertoletti G(3), Vincenzoni C(4), Snider F(4),
Arena V(5), Landolfi R(6), Flex A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, A. Gemelli University Hospital, Catholic University
School of Medicine, Rome, Italy; Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Genetics,
Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Medicine,
St M. Goretti Hospital, Latina, Italy. (3)Department of Vascular Surgery, St M.
Goretti Hospital, Latina, Italy. (4)Department of Vascular Surgery, A. Gemelli
University Hospital, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathology, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy. 
(6)Department of Medicine, A. Gemelli University Hospital, Catholic University
School of Medicine, Rome, Italy. (7)Department of Medicine, A. Gemelli University
Hospital, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy; Laboratory of
Vascular Biology and Genetics, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome,
Italy. Electronic address: andrea.flex@rm.unicatt.it.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis and vascular remodeling after injury are driven by
inflammation and mononuclear cell infiltration. Unstable atherosclerotic plaques 
are characterized by a large necrotic core. In this study we investigated the
distribution and interaction between gene polymorphisms encoding proinflammatory 
molecules in an Italian population with internal carotid artery stenosis (ICAS). 
We also evaluated whether reciprocal interaction between these gene polymorphisms
increased the risk of plaque vulnerability.
METHODS: In this genetic association study, 11 proinflammatory gene polymorphisms
were analyzed in 933 individuals comprising 344 patients with ICAS who underwent 
carotid endarterectomy and 589 controls without ultrasound evidence of
atherosclerosis or intimal thickening.
RESULTS: We found that interleukin (IL) 6 (IL-6), IL-1β, monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (CCL2) macrophage inflammatory protein-1α (CCL3), E-selectin (SELE),
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), and matrix metalloproteinase-3
(MMP-3), and 9 (MMP-9) gene variants were independently and significantly
associated with ICAS. The association remained significant even after the
Bonferroni correction. We also found a genetic profile associated with different 
risks for ICAS, depending on the number of high-risk genotypes simultaneously
present in an individual. Furthermore, proinflammatory genetic profiles are
significantly more common in individuals with unstable carotid plaque.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows, for the first time, a reciprocal interaction
between proinflammatory genotypes for the development and progression of ICAS.

Copyright © 2015 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25441669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Thromb Haemost. 2015 Mar;113(3):605-16. doi: 10.1160/TH14-02-0151. Epub 2014 Nov 
20.

Coronary artery endothelial cells and microparticles increase expression of
VCAM-1 in myocardial infarction.

Radecke CE, Warrick AE, Singh GD, Rogers JH, Simon SI(1), Armstrong EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scott I. Simon, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California
at Davis, 451 East Health Sciences Drive, Davis, CA 95616, USA, Tel.: +1 530 752 
0299, E-mail sisimon@ucdavis.edu.

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is characterised by progressive atherosclerotic
plaque leading to flow-limiting stenosis, while myocardial infarction (MI) occurs
due to plaque rupture or erosion with abrupt coronary artery occlusion. Multiple 
inflammatory pathways influence plaque stability, but direct assessment of
endothelial inflammation at the site of coronary artery stenosis has largely been
limited to pathology samples or animal models of atherosclerosis. We describe a
technique for isolating and characterising endothelial cells (ECs) and EC
microparticles (EMPs) derived directly from the site of coronary artery plaque
during balloon angioplasty and percutaneous coronary intervention. Coronary
artery endothelial cells (CAECs) were identified using imaging flow cytometry
(IFC), and individual CAEC and EMP expression of the pro-atherogenic adhesion
molecule vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) was assessed immediately
following angioplasty. Patients with MI registered 73 % higher VCAM-1 expression 
on their CAECs and 79 % higher expression on EMPs compared to patients with
stable CAD. In contrast, VCAM-1 expression was absent on ECs in the peripheral
circulation from these same subjects. VCAM-1 density was significantly higher on 
CAECs and EMPs among patients with MI and positively correlated with markers of
myocardial infarct size. We conclude that increased VCAM-1 expression on EC and
formation of EMP at the site of coronary plaque is positively correlated with the
extent of vascular inflammation in patients with myocardial infarction.

PMCID: PMC4479188
PMID: 25413339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Mar;11(3):2027-33. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2917. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Soluble P-selectin promotes acute myocardial infarction onset but not severity.

Guo L(1), Sun G(1), Wang G(2), Ning W(3), Zhao K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pharmacy,
The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang
150001, P.R. China. (3)Department of Emergency, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

P‑selectin, an integral membrane glycoprotein of platelets and endothelial cells,
and the soluble form of P‑selectin are hypothesized to play a role in the
initiation of atherosclerosis and acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However,
limited data are available with which to evaluate the main role of soluble
P‑selectin (sP‑selectin) in the onset or the severity of AMI. In the present
study, we investigated 15 patients who suffered from angina, 10 patients who
underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) therapy and 10 patients who
underwent thrombolysis therapy, compared with 15 volunteers with no
cardiovascular disease. We confirmed that the plasma sP‑selectin levels were
increased in patients with obesity (particularly pericardial obesity) and
hyperlipidemia, positively correlated with plasma tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‑α
and strongly negatively correlated with adiponectin in all patients regardless of
AMI status. Furthermore, sP‑selectin levels were significantly higher in PCI and 
thrombolysis patients compared with angina patients and the control cohort.
However, we observed that sP‑selectin levels did not change following PCI and
thrombolysis therapy. In addition, there was no correlation between sP‑selectin
levels and the severity of AMI in the cohort which received PCI or thrombolysis
therapy. Therefore, we deduced that sP‑selectin only induced the onset of AMI but
did not promote its severity. To confirm this hypothesis, a P‑selectin inhibitor 
was administered to an atherosclerosis formation model, plaque rapture model and 
neointimal hyperplasia model. We revealed that atherosclerotic plaque formation
and rupture, neointimal formation and neointimal bleeding were suppressed by the 
sP‑selectin inhibitor. We concluded that sP‑selectin, induced by systemic
inflammation in conditions including obesity and hyperlipidemia, promoted
atherosclerotic plaque and neointimal formation, plaque rapture and neointimal
bleeding, further leading to AMI. We also demonstrated that sP‑selectin had no
effect on the severity of AMI.

PMID: 25384966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Curr Drug Targets. 2015;16(4):321-33.

Update on the role of neutrophils in atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability.

Carbone F(1), Mach F, Montecucco F.

Author information: 
(1)Division, Foundation for Medical Researches, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Geneva, 64 Avenue Roseraie, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
federico.carbone@unige.ch.

Atherosclerosis is the main pathophysiological process underlying acute
cardiovascular diseases. Life-threatening conditions, such as myocardial
infarction and ischemic stroke, are provoked by the sudden rupture of vulnerable 
atherosclerotic plaques, characterized by thin, highly inflamed and collagen-poor
fibrous cap. Whereas both innate and adaptive inflammation progressively emerged 
as driving force of this processes, less is known about the involvement of
neutrophils (PMNs). Advances in laboratory techniques during the last two decades
disclosed that PMNs play a crucial role in promoting plaque vulnerability by the 
release of different enzymes, such as gelatinases (matrix metalloproteinases)
collagenases, elastase and myeloperoxidase. Accordingly, circulating levels of
PMNs and their products have been investigated as potential markers of plaque
instability in both primary and secondary prevention on cardiovascular diseases. 
In addition, the development of different classes of drugs targeting PMNs
activation is emerging as an interesting field of research. This narrative review
will provide an update on the role of PMNs in promoting plaque vulnerability also
discussing the potential effects of therapeutic strategies targeting PMN on
plaque vulnerability.

PMID: 25382205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Hamostaseologie. 2015;35(2):113-20. doi: 10.5482/HAMO-14-08-0034. Epub 2014 Nov
7.

The role of mast cells in atherosclerosis.

Wezel A, Quax PH, Kuiper J, Bot I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ilze Bot, Division of Biopharmaceutics, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug
Research Gorlaeus Laboratories, Leiden University Einsteinweg 55, 2333 CC,
Leiden, The Netherlands, Tel. +31/(0)71/527 62 13, E-mail:
i.bot@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl.

Rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque is the major underlying cause of adverse
cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction or stroke. Therapeutic
interventions should therefore be directed towards inhibiting growth of
atherosclerotic lesions as well as towards prevention of lesion destabilization. 
Interestingly, the presence of mast cells has been demonstrated in both murine
and human plaques, and multiple interventional murine studies have pointed out a 
direct role for mast cells in early and late stages of atherosclerosis. Moreover,
it has recently been described that activated lesional mast cells correlate with 
major cardiovascular events in patients suffering from cardiovascular disease.
This review focuses on the effect of different mast cell derived mediators in
atherogenesis and in late stage plaque destabilization. Also, possible ligands
for mast cell activation in the context of atherosclerosis are discussed.
Finally, we will elaborate on the predictive value of mast cells, together with
therapeutic implications, in cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 25377048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2015 May;20(3):261-75. doi:
10.1177/1074248414555005. Epub 2014 Oct 21.

How do we prevent the vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque from rupturing? Insights 
from in vivo assessments of plaque, vascular remodeling, and local endothelial
shear stress.

Andreou I(1), Antoniadis AP(1), Shishido K(1), Papafaklis MI(1), Koskinas KC(1), 
Chatzizisis YS(1), Coskun AU(1), Edelman ER(1), Feldman CL(1), Stone PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA. (2)The Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA pstone@partners.org.

Coronary atherosclerosis progresses both as slow, gradual enlargement of focal
plaque and also as a more dynamic process with periodic abrupt changes in plaque 
geometry, size, and morphology. Systemic vasculoprotective therapies such as
statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and antiplatelet agents are
the cornerstone of prevention of plaque rupture and new adverse clinical
outcomes, but such systemic therapies are insufficient to prevent the majority of
new cardiac events. Invasive imaging methods have been able to identify both the 
anatomic features of high-risk plaque and the ongoing pathobiological stimuli
responsible for progressive plaque inflammation and instability and may provide
sufficient information to formulate preventive local mechanical strategies (eg,
preemptive percutaneous coronary interventions) to avert cardiac events. Local
endothelial shear stress (ESS) triggers vascular phenomena that synergistically
exacerbate atherosclerosis toward an unstable phenotype. Specifically, low ESS
augments lipid uptake and catabolism, induces plaque inflammation and oxidation, 
downregulates the production, upregulates the degradation of extracellular
matrix, and increases cellular apoptosis ultimately leading to thin-cap
fibroatheromas and/or endothelial erosions. Increases in blood thrombogenicity
that result from either high or low ESS also contribute to plaque
destabilization. An understanding of the actively evolving vascular phenomena, as
well as the development of in vivo imaging methodologies to identify the presence
and severity of the different processes, may enable early identification of a
coronary plaque destined to acquire a high-risk state and allow for highly
selective, focal preventive interventions to avert the adverse natural history of
that particular plaque. In this review, we focus on the role of ESS in the
pathobiologic processes responsible for plaque destabilization, leading either to
accelerated plaque growth or to acute coronary events, and emphasize the
potential to utilize in vivo risk stratification of individual coronary plaques
to optimize prevention strategies to preclude new cardiac events.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25336461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2014 Dec;16(12):547. doi: 10.1007/s11886-014-0547-7.

Biomarkers of plaque instability.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Atherosclerosis Prevention and Treatment Center,
Oppenheimer Atherosclerosis Research Center, Cedars Sinai Heart Institute, 127
South San Vicente Blvd: Suite A3307, Los Angeles, CA, 90048, USA, shahp@cshs.org.

Atherosclerosis is the proximate cause of arterial thrombosis, leading to acute
occlusive cardiovascular syndromes. Thrombosis in atherosclerosis usually results
from rupture of the fibrous cap of atherosclerotic plaques with a smaller
proportion resulting from superficial endothelial erosion. Ruptured plaques are
often associated with intimal and adventitial inflammation, increased size of
lipid-rich necrotic core with thinned out collagen-depleted fibrous cap, outward 
remodeling, increased plaque neovascularity, intraplaque hemorrhage, and
microcalcification. By inference, non-ruptured plaques with similar compositional
features are considered to be at risk for rupture and hence are labeled
vulnerable plaques or high-risk plaques. Identification of vulnerable plaques may
help in predicting the risk of acute occlusive syndromes and may also allow
targeting for aggressive systemic and possibly local therapies. Plaque rupture is
believed to result from extracellular matrix (which comprises the protective
fibrous cap) dysregulation due to excessive proteolysis in the context of
diminished matrix synthesis. Inflammation is believed to play a key role by
providing matrix-degrading metalloproteinases and also by inducing death of
matrix-synthesizing smooth muscle cells. Systemic markers of inflammation are
thus the most logical forms of potential biomarkers which may predict the
presence of vulnerable or high-risk plaques. Several studies have suggested the
potential prognostic value of a variety of systemic markers, but regrettably,
their overall clinical predictive value is modestly incremental at best,
especially for individual subjects compared to groups of patients. Nevertheless, 
continued investigation of reliable, cost-effective biomarkers that predict the
presence of a high-risk plaque and future athero-thrombotic cardiovascular events
with greater sensitivity and specificity is warranted.

PMID: 25326730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. World J Clin Cases. 2014 Oct 16;2(10):497-506. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v2.i10.497.

Practical strategies for modulating foam cell formation and behavior.

Uitz E(1), Bahadori B(1), McCarty MF(1), Moghadasian MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Elisabeth Uitz, Babak Bahadori, Department of Internal Medicine 2, University 
Hospital of St. Poelten, Karl Landsteiner Private University of Health and Life
Sciences, Probst-Fuehrer-Str. 4, Austria.

Although high density lipoprotein (HDL)-mediated reverse cholesterol transport is
crucial to the prevention and reversal of atheroma, a recent meta-analysis makes 
evident that current pharmaceutical strategies for modulating HDL cholesterol
levels lower cardiovascular risk only to the extent that they concurrently
decrease low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. This corresponds well with
findings of a recent Mendelian randomization analysis, in which genetic
polymorphisms associated with HDL cholesterol but no other known cardiovascular
risk factors failed to predict risk for myocardial infarction. Although it is
still seems appropriate to search for therapies that could improve the efficiency
with which HDL particles induce reverse cholesterol transport, targeting HDL
cholesterol levels per se with current measures appears to be futile. It may
therefore be more promising to promote reverse cholesterol transport with agents 
that directly target foam cells. Macrophage expression of the cholesterol
transport proteins adenosine triphosphate binding cassette transporter A1,
adenosine triphosphate binding cassette transporter G1, and scavenger receptor
class B member 1 is transcriptionally up-regulated by activated liver X receptors
(LXR), whereas nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB antagonizes their expression. Taurine, 
which inhibits atherogenesis in rodent studies, has just been discovered to act
as a weak agonist for LXRalpha. Conversely, it may be possible to oppose
NF-kappaB activation in macrophages with a range of measures. Induction of heme
oxygenase-1, which can be attained with phase 2 inducer phytochemicals such as
lipoic acid and green tea catechins, promotes reverse cholesterol transport in
macrophages and inhibits atherogenesis in rodents, likely due to, in large part, 
NF-kappaB antagonism. Inhibition of macrophage nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH) oxidase activity with the spirulina-derived bilirubin-mimetic
phycocyanobilin may also oppose NF-kappaB activation, and salicylic acid
similarly should be useful for this purpose. The 5' adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase activator berberine promotes macrophage
reverse cholesterol transport in cell culture; metformin probably shares this
property. Many of these measures could also be expected to promote plaque
stability by suppressing foam cell production of inflammatory cytokines and
matrix metalloproteinases, and to reduce intimal monocyte infiltration by
anti-inflammatory effects on vascular endothelium. Direct targeting of foam cells
with agents such as phase 2 inducers, spirulina, salicylate, taurine, and
berberine or metformin, may hence have considerable potential for preventing and 
reversing atheroma, and for preventing the plaque rupture that triggers vascular 
thrombosis.

PMCID: PMC4198401
PMID: 25325059  [PubMed]


68. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(9):1196-204.

Development of anti-atherosclerosis therapy based on the inflammatory and
proliferative aspects of the disease.

Maranhão RC, Leite AC Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Metabolismo e Lipides, Instituto do Coracao (InCor) do Hospital
das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo (HCFMUSP). Av.
Dr. Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 44, bloco 2, 1° subsolo. Sao Paulo - SP, 05403-000,
Brazil. ramarans@usp.br.

Atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases are a worldwide major public health
concern. Atherosclerosis is driven by a chronic inflammatory process which is
present since the early stages of the disease, as a response to endothelium
aggression by a variety of offending agents, to subsequent formation of foam
cells, atheromatous plaque development and the clinical complications of the
disease, due to plaque rupture and thromboembolic acute episodes. However, drug
therapies directed to inflammation are lacking in the clinical practice, despite 
an increasing effort of research and identification of several potential
molecular targets. Effective medical treatments available for primary and
secondary prevention are restricted to cholesterol lowering statins and
anti-platelet drugs such as aspirin. Here, steps of atherogenesis, cells involved
in the process, secreted pro- and anti-inflammatory factors, the concept of
unstable and stable atheroma plaques, the intertwining among inflammation, lipid 
arterial deposit, thrombus formation, therapeutically targetable mechanisms,
monoclonal antibodies, enzymatic inhibitors, phytotherapeutic compounds and
anti-proliferative agents used in cancer chemotherapy, drugs tested in
experimental animals and at the clinical stage are shortly reviewed. Because
statins and anti-platelet drugs use do not prevent more than 30-40% of the major 
cardiovascular events, the development of novel therapeutic tools is desirable.
Nonetheless, atherosclerosis is a chronic process presumably demanding
long-standing treatments, so that the safety, opportunity, cost-effectiveness and
development of drug resistance are major issues that challenge the introduction
of novel, inflammation-oriented therapies.

PMID: 25312729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;809:83-101.

Translational studies of A20 in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.

McGillicuddy FC, Moll HP, Farouk S, Damrauer SM, Ferran C, Reilly MP.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the biggest killer in the Western World despite
significant advances in understanding its molecular underpinnings. Chronic
inflammation, the classical hallmark of atherogenesis is thought to play a key
pathogenic role in the development of atherosclerotic lesions from initiation of 
fatty streaks to plaque rupture. Over-representation of mostly pro-inflammatory
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) target genes within atherosclerotic lesions
has led to the common-held belief that excessive NF-kappaB activity promotes and 
aggravates atherogenesis. However, mouse models lacking various proteins involved
in NF-kappaB signaling have often resulted in conflicting findings, fueling
additional investigations to uncover the molecular involvement of NF-kappaB and
its target genes in atherogenesis. In this chapter we will review the role of the
NF-kappaB-regulated, yet potent NF-kappaB inhibitory and anti-inflammatory gene
A20/TNFAIP3 in atherogenesis, and highlight the potential use of its
atheroprotective properties for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular
diseases.

PMID: 25302367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Nov;237(1):307-13. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.09.028. Epub 2014 Oct 2.

b-Gamma-glutamyltransferase activity in human vulnerable carotid plaques.

Pucci A(1), Franzini M(2), Matteucci M(2), Ceragioli S(3), Marconi M(3), Ferrari 
M(3), Passino C(4), Basolo F(5), Emdin M(4), Paolicchi A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Histopathology Department, University Hospital, Pisa, Italy. Electronic
address: a.pucci@ao-pisa.toscana.it. (2)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola
Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy. (3)Vascular Surgery Department, University of
Pisa, Italy. (4)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa,
Italy; Fondazione G. Monasterio CNR-Regione Toscana, Pisa, Italy. (5)Surgical and
Medical Pathology Department, University of Pisa, Italy. (6)Translational
Research Department, University of Pisa, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The atherosclerotic plaque that is vulnerable to rupture and to
superimposed thrombosis is mainly represented by a thin-cap fibroatheroma with or
without ulceration/thrombosis and inflammatory infiltrates. Total serum
gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) activity is an independent predictor for
cardiovascular events. Four GGT fractions have been identified in plasma and only
one of them (b-GGT) in atherosclerotic plaques, but the possible role of GGT in
plaque pathophysiology has not been assessed yet. We investigated the
relationships between plaque b-GGT activity and the histological features of
plaque vulnerability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plaque GGT activity was investigated in 65 patients
undergoing carotid endarterectomy; plaques were histologically characterized and 
immunostained for GGT. Intra-plaque total and fractional GGT activity was
determined by a cost-effective test of molecular size exclusion chromatography,
and compared with histological markers of plaque vulnerability. Plaque
cholesterol content was also measured by chromatography. b-GGT was the only
fraction detected within the atherosclerotic plaques and intra-plaque b-GGT
activity correlated to plaque cholesterol content (r = 0.667, P < 0.0001), plasma
b-GGT and f-GGT fractions (r = 0.249; r = 0.298, both P < 0.05). Higher b-GGT
activity was found in thin-cap fibroatheromas and it was associated to
histological markers of vulnerable plaques, i.e., larger necrotic areas, greater 
macrophage infiltration and higher cholesterol content (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: intra-plaque b-GGT activity correlates with the histological markers
of vulnerable plaque and with plasma b-GGT in human carotid atherosclerosis;
these data support the possible role of b-GGT in clinically significant
atherosclerotic disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25299965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Nov;237(1):177-82. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.08.042. Epub 2014 Sep 6.

Evidence for altered inflammatory and repair responses in symptomatic carotid
plaques from elderly patients.

Grufman H(1), Schiopu A(2), Edsfeldt A(2), Björkbacka H(3), Nitulescu M(3),
Nilsson M(2), Persson A(2), Nilsson J(3), Gonçalves I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences
Malmö, Lund University, Sweden. Electronic address: helena.grufman@med.lu.se.
(2)Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences
Malmö, Lund University, Sweden; Department of Cardiology, Skåne University
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. (3)Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit, Department
of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Most acute cardiovascular events are caused by rupture of an
atherosclerotic plaque. The incidence of cardiovascular events increases with age
and inflammation is generally considered to be the main cause of increased plaque
vulnerability. However, the relationship between age and plaque inflammation has 
not yet been fully clarified. The aim of our study was to determine if
age-dependent plaque vulnerability is associated with increased plaque
inflammation.
METHODS: We collected 200 endarterectomy specimens, 103 of which were from
patients 70 years or older. One-hundred and five patients had a recent
cerebrovascular event, whereas the rest were asymptomatic despite significant
carotid stenosis. Smooth muscle cell, lipid and macrophage content were analyzed 
by histology. Cytokines, growth factors and extracellular matrix proteins were
analyzed in whole plaque homogenates by immunoassays and biochemical methods.
RESULTS: Plaques from elderly patients contained less IFN-γ, TNF-α, fractalkine, 
sCD40L, and elastin. Lipid and macrophage content was higher in plaques from
symptomatic compared to asymptomatic patients in the elderly group, but not in
younger patients. The elastin and collagen content was lower in plaques from
symptomatic patients in both age groups. Plaques associated with symptoms also
contained more TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, sCD40L, MIP-1β, MCP-1, RANTES and VEGF,
regardless of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data imply that increased plaque vulnerability in the
symptomatic elderly patients is associated with increased lipid accumulation and 
impaired tissue repair, rather than with increased plaque inflammation, compared 
to younger individuals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Curr Cardiovasc Imaging Rep. 2014 Oct 1;7(10):9293.

Molecular intravascular imaging approaches for atherosclerosis.

Press MC(1), Jaffer FA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical
Center, Los Angeles, California. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Cardiology
Division; Wellman Center for Photomedicine; Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is an inflammatory process that results in buildup 
of atherosclerosis, typically lipid-rich plaque in the arterial wall. Progressive
narrowing of the vessel wall and subsequent plaque rupture can lead to myocardial
infarction and death. Recent advances in intravascular fluorescence imaging
techniques have provided exciting coronary artery-targeted platforms to further
characterize the molecular changes that occur within the vascular wall as a
result of atherosclerosis and following coronary stent-induced vascular injury.
This review will summarize exciting recent developments in catheter-based imaging
of coronary arterial-sized vessels; focusing on two-dimensional near-infrared
fluorescence imaging (NIRF) molecular imaging technology as an approach to
specifically identify inflammation and fibrin directly within coronary
artery-sized vessels. Intravascular NIRF is anticipated to provide new insights
into the in vivo biology underlying high-risk plaques, as well as high-risks
stents prone to stent restenosis or stent thrombosis.

PMCID: PMC4159198
PMID: 25221639  [PubMed]


73. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Oct;236(2):456-60. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.07.037. Epub 2014 Aug 15.

Early inflammatory cytokine response: a direct comparison between spontaneous
coronary plaque destabilization vs angioplasty induced.

Brunetti ND(1), Correale M(2), Pellegrino PL(2), Munno I(3), Cuculo A(2), De
Gennaro L(2), Gaglione A(2), Di Biase M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, University of Foggia, Viale Pinto 1, 71100 Foggia,
Italy. Electronic address: natale.brunetti@unifg.it. (2)Cardiology Department,
University of Foggia, Viale Pinto 1, 71100 Foggia, Italy. (3)Immunology
Department, University of Bari, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 1, 70121 Bari, Italy.

AIM: To compare inflammatory response accompanying acute coronary syndrome (ACS) 
with that following coronary plaque rupture caused by coronary angioplasty (PCI).
METHODS: Twenty-seven consecutive subjects with either ACS or treated with PCI in
the subacute phase of ACS underwent serial evaluation of circulating interleukin 
(IL)-2, IL-8, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-γ and tumor-necrosis-factor (TNF)-α levels.
Blood samples were drawn immediately before angioplasty (T0) in the PCI group or 
at admission in the ACS group, 12 h (T1) and 24 h later (T2).
RESULTS: Differences between cytokine levels were substantially not statistically
significant when comparing PCI, non-ST-elevation-ACS, and ST-elevation-ACS
groups, especially 24 h after plaque rupture (T2, Type-II error 85-94%).
CONCLUSIONS: Inflammatory activation during the first 24 h of ACS or after PCI is
comparable, regardless of myocardial damage in terms of troponin levels. Coronary
plaque rupture may be presumed as being the main responsible for increased
circulating cytokine levels in this early phase.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Oct;236(2):448-55. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.07.034. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Periodontal bacteria in human carotid atherothrombosis as a potential trigger for
neutrophil activation.

Rangé H(1), Labreuche J(2), Louedec L(2), Rondeau P(3), Planesse C(3), Sebbag
U(4), Bourdon E(3), Michel JB(2), Bouchard P(5), Meilhac O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1148, CHU X. Bichat, APHP, 46 Rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France; 
Département de Parodontologie, Hôpital Rothschild, APHP, 5 Rue Santerre, 75012
Paris, France; Université Paris Diderot, UFR d'Odontologie, 5 Rue Garancière,
75006 Paris, France. (2)Inserm U1148, CHU X. Bichat, APHP, 46 Rue Henri Huchard, 
75018 Paris, France. (3)Université de La Réunion, 15, Avenue René Cassin, 97744
Saint-Denis, Ile de La Réunion, France. (4)Centre Cardiologique du Nord, 36 Rue
des Moulins Gémeaux, 93200 Saint-Denis, France. (5)Département de Parodontologie,
Hôpital Rothschild, APHP, 5 Rue Santerre, 75012 Paris, France; Université Paris
Diderot, UFR d'Odontologie, 5 Rue Garancière, 75006 Paris, France. (6)Inserm
U1148, CHU X. Bichat, APHP, 46 Rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France; CHU de La 
Réunion, Saint Denis, Ile de La Réunion, France. Electronic address:
olivier.meilhac@inserm.fr.

OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological, biological and clinical links between periodontal and
cardiovascular diseases are now well established. Several human studies have
detected bacterial DNA corresponding to periodontal pathogens in cardiovascular
samples. Intraplaque hemorrhage has been associated with a higher risk of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture, potentially mediated by neutrophil activation. In
this study, we hypothesized that plaque composition may be related to periodontal
pathogens.
METHODS: Carotid culprit plaque samples were collected from 157 patients.
Macroscopic characterization was performed at the time of collection: presence of
blood, lipid core, calcification and fibrosis. Markers of neutrophil activation
released by carotid samples were quantified (myeloperoxidase or MPO, cell-free
DNA and DNA-MPO complexes). PCR analysis using specific primers for Porphyromonas
gingivalis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcommitans, Treponema denticola,
Prevotella intermedia and Tannerella forsythia was used to detect DNA from
periodontal pathogens in carotid tissues. In addition, bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Immunoglobulins G against T. forsythia were
quantified in atherosclerotic carotid conditioned medium.
RESULTS: Intraplaque hemorrhage was present in 73/157 carotid samples and was
associated with neutrophil activation, reflected by the release of MPO, cell-free
DNA and MPO-DNA complexes. LPS levels were also linked to intraplaque hemorrhage 
but not with the neutrophil activation markers. Seventy-three percent of the
carotid samples were positive for periodontal bacterial DNA. Furthermore,
hemoglobin levels were associated with the detection of T. forsythia and
neutrophil activation/inflammation markers.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests a potential role of periodontal microorganisms,
especially T. forsythia, in neutrophil activation within hemorrhagic
atherosclerotic carotid plaques.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Oct 1;104(1):160-70. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu189. Epub 2014 Aug 
18.

Glyoxalase 1 overexpression does not affect atherosclerotic lesion size and
severity in ApoE-/- mice with or without diabetes.

Hanssen NM(1), Brouwers O(1), Gijbels MJ(2), Wouters K(1), Wijnands E(3),
Cleutjens JP(3), De Mey JG(4), Miyata T(5), Biessen EA(3), Stehouwer CD(1),
Schalkwijk CG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University
Medical Centre (MUMC), Maastricht, The Netherlands Department of Internal
Medicine, Laboratory for Metabolism and Vascular Medicine, MUMC, Debeyelaan 25,
PO Box 5800, 6202 AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands. (2)Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University Medical Centre (MUMC),
Maastricht, The Netherlands Department of Pathology, MUMC, Maastricht, The
Netherlands Department of Molecular Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Amsterdam Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht 
University Medical Centre (MUMC), Maastricht, The Netherlands Department of
Pathology, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands. (4)Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University Medical Centre (MUMC),
Maastricht, The Netherlands Department of Cardiovascular and Renal Research,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (5)United Centers for Advanced
Research and Translational Medicine (ART), Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht 
(CARIM), Maastricht University Medical Centre (MUMC), Maastricht, The Netherlands
Department of Internal Medicine, Laboratory for Metabolism and Vascular Medicine,
MUMC, Debeyelaan 25, PO Box 5800, 6202 AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands
c.schalkwijk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

AIMS: Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) and their precursors have been
associated with the development of atherosclerosis. We recently discovered that
glyoxalase 1 (GLO1), the major detoxifying enzyme for AGE precursors, is
decreased in ruptured human plaques, and that levels of AGEs are higher in
rupture-prone plaques. We here investigated whether overexpression of human GLO1 
in ApoE(-/-) mice could reduce the development of atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We crossed C57BL/6 ApoE(-/-) mice with C57BL/6 GLO1
overexpressing mice (huGLO1(+/-)) to generate ApoE(-/-) (n = 16) and ApoE(-/-)
huGLO1(+/-) (n = 20) mice. To induce diabetes, we injected a subset with
streptozotocin (STZ) to generate diabetic ApoE(-/-) (n = 8) and ApoE(-/-)
huGLO1(+/-) (n = 13) mice. All mice were fed chow and sacrificed at 25 weeks of
age. The GLO1 activity was three-fold increased in huGLO1(+/-) aorta, but aortic 
root lesion size and phenotype did not differ between mice with and without
huGLO1(+/-) overexpression. We detected no differences in gene expression in
aortic arches, in AGE levels and cytokines, in circulating cells, and endothelial
function between ApoE(-/-) mice with and without huGLO1(+/-) overexpression.
Although diabetic mice showed decreased GLO1 expression (P < 0.05) and increased 
lesion size (P < 0.05) in comparison with non-diabetic mice, GLO1 overexpression 
also did not affect the aortic root lesion size or inflammation in diabetic mice.
CONCLUSION: In ApoE(-/-) mice with or without diabetes, GLO1 overexpression did
not lead to decreased atherosclerotic lesion size or systemic inflammation.
Increasing GLO1 levels does not seem to be an effective strategy to reduce
glycation in atherosclerotic lesions, likely due to increased AGE formation
through GLO1-independent mechanisms.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2014. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25139743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2016 Mar;22(2):171-7. doi: 10.1177/1076029614546329.
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Oxidative Stress and Spontaneous Reperfusion of Infarct-Related Artery in
Patients With ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction.

Börekçi A(1), Gür M(2), Türkoğlu C(3), Selek Ş(4), Baykan AO(5), Şeker T(5),
Harbalıoğlu H(5), Özaltun B(5), Makça İ(5), Aksoy N(6), Gözükara Y(7), Çaylı
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Kafkas University, Kars, Turkey.
(2)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Kafkas University, Kars, Turkey 
drmugur@yahoo.com. (3)Department of Cardiology, Yenimahalle State Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey. (4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Bezmialem
University, İstanbul, Turkey. (5)Department of Cardiology, Adana Numune Training 
and Research Hospital, Adana, Turkey. (6)Department of Biochemistry, School of
Medicine, Harran University, Şanlıurfa, Turkey. (7)Department of Internal
Medicine, Mersin State Hospital, Mersin, Turkey.

In the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, oxidative stress plays a major role in
plaque instability, rupture, and erosion, which subsequently leads to thrombus
formation and causes total infarct-related artery (IRA) occlusion. We
investigated the relationship between spontaneous reperfusion (SR) of IRA and
oxidative stress in patients with anterior ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI) undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention. A total
of 341 consecutive patients with anterior STEMI were prospectively included in
the present study. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to their
thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grade: SR group (66 patients,
TIMI flow 3) and non-SR group (275 patients, TIMI flow 0-2). On multivariate
logistic regression analysis, oxidative stress index (β = 0.868, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 0.806-0.934, P < .001), neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, uric
acid, mean platelet volume, Killip 2 to 4 class, and initial SYNTAX score were
independently associated with SR. Oxidative stress as well as inflammation may
play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of SR in patients with STEMI.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25115763  [PubMed - in process]


77. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Aug 5;3(4). pii: e000785. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.000785.

Galectin-3, a biomarker linking oxidative stress and inflammation with the
clinical outcomes of patients with atherothrombosis.

Madrigal-Matute J(1), Lindholt JS(2), Fernandez-Garcia CE(3), Benito-Martin A(3),
Burillo E(3), Zalba G(4), Beloqui O(5), Llamas-Granda P(3), Ortiz A(3), Egido
J(6), Blanco-Colio LM(3), Martin-Ventura JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Lab, IIS Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Autónoma University, IRSIN,
Madrid, Spain (J.M.M., C.E.F.G., A.B.M., E.B., P.L.G., A.O., J.E., L.M.B.C.,
J.L.M.V.) Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY (J.M.M.). (2)Vascular Research Unit, Viborg
Hospital, Viborg, Denmark (J.S.L.). (3)Vascular Research Lab, IIS Fundación
Jiménez Díaz, Autónoma University, IRSIN, Madrid, Spain (J.M.M., C.E.F.G.,
A.B.M., E.B., P.L.G., A.O., J.E., L.M.B.C., J.L.M.V.). (4)Division of
Cardiovascular Sciences, CIMA University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain (G.Z.)
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
(G.Z.). (5)University Clinic, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain (O.B.).
(6)Vascular Research Lab, IIS Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Autónoma University, IRSIN,
Madrid, Spain (J.M.M., C.E.F.G., A.B.M., E.B., P.L.G., A.O., J.E., L.M.B.C.,
J.L.M.V.) Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain (J.E.).

BACKGROUND: Galectin-3 (Gal-3) participates in different mechanisms involved in
atherothrombosis, such as inflammation, proliferation, or macrophage chemotaxis. 
Thus, there have been committed intensive efforts to elucidate the function of
Gal-3 in cardiovascular (CV) diseases. The role of Gal-3 as a circulating
biomarker has been demonstrated in patients with heart failure, but its
importance as a biomarker in atherothrombosis is still unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Because Gal-3 is involved in monocyte-to-macrophage
transition, we used fresh isolated monocytes and the in vitro model of macrophage
differentiation of THP-1 cells stimulated with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA).
Gal-3 release is increased by PMA in human monocytes and macrophages, a process
involving exosomes and regulated by reactive oxygen species/NADPH oxidase
activity. In asymptomatic subjects (n=199), Gal-3 plasma levels are correlated
with NADPH oxidase activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (r=0.476;
P<0.001) and carotid intima-media thickness (r=0.438; P<0.001), a surrogate
marker of atherosclerosis. Accordingly, Gal-3 plasma concentrations are increased
in patients with carotid atherosclerosis (n=158), compared to control subjects
(n=115; 14.3 [10.7 to 16.9] vs. 10.4 [8.6 to 12.5] ng/mL; P<0.001). Finally, on a
5-year follow-up study in patients with peripheral artery disease, Gal-3
concentrations are significantly and independently associated with an increased
risk for CV mortality (hazard ratio=2.24, 95% confidence interval: 1.06 to 4.73, 
P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Gal-3 extracellular levels could reflect key underlying mechanisms
involved in atherosclerosis etiology, development, and plaque rupture, such as
inflammation, infiltration of circulating cells and oxidative stress. Moreover,
circulating Gal-3 concentrations are associated with clinical outcomes in
patients with atherothrombosis.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4310363
PMID: 25095870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Oct;34(10):2224-31. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303426. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Thin-cap fibroatheroma rupture is associated with a fine interplay of shear and
wall stress.

Pedrigi RM(1), de Silva R(1), Bovens SM(1), Mehta VV(1), Petretto E(1), Krams
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom (R.M.P., S.M.B., V.V.M., R.K.); NHLI, Imperial College London and NIHR
Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom (R.d.S.); and MRC-Clinical Sciences
Centre, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom (E.P.). (2)From the
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
(R.M.P., S.M.B., V.V.M., R.K.); NHLI, Imperial College London and NIHR
Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom (R.d.S.); and MRC-Clinical Sciences
Centre, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom (E.P.).
r.krams@imperial.ac.uk.

In this review, we summarized the effect of mechanical factors (shear and wall
stress) on thin-cap fibroatheroma formation and rupture. To make this review
understandable for a biology-oriented audience, we start with detailed
definitions of relevant mechanical metrics. We then describe how biomechanics has
supported histopathologic efforts to understand the basis of plaque rupture. In
addition to plaque rupture, biomechanics also contributes toward the progression 
of thin-cap fibroatheroma through a multitude of reported mechanobiological
mechanisms. We thus propose a new mechanism whereby both shear stress and wall
stress interact to create thin-cap fibroatheromas. Specifically, when regions of 
certain blood flow and wall mechanical stimuli coincide, they synergistically
create inflammation within the cellular environment that can lead to thin-cap
fibroatheroma rupture. A consequence of this postulate is that local shear stress
is not sufficient to cause rupture, but it must coincide with regions of local
tissue stiffening and stress concentrations that can occur during plaque
progression. Because such changes to the wall mechanics occur over a micrometer
scale, high spatial resolution imaging techniques will be necessary to evaluate
this hypothesis and ultimately predict plaque rupture in a clinical environment.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25060797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Immunobiology. 2014 Oct;219(10):786-92. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.06.006. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

Cholesterol crystal-induced endothelial cell activation is complement-dependent
and mediated by TNF.

Nymo S(1), Niyonzima N(2), Espevik T(2), Mollnes TE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nordland Hospital, Bodø, Norway. Electronic
address: stig.nymo@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway; Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of 
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nordland
Hospital, Bodø, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø,
Tromsø, Norway; Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, Norway; Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen IRC, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Cholesterol crystals are known to be a hallmark of atherosclerosis with recent
studies demonstrating deposition of these crystals in early fatty streak
formation as well as penetrating the intima following plaque rupture.
Inflammation has also become a central focus in atheroma development and
endothelial cell activation is recognized as necessary for the recruitment of
inflammatory cells to the plaque. However, the extent to which cholesterol
crystals can induce inflammation and activate endothelial cells is not known. To 
investigate this, we developed a novel model activating human umbilical vein
endothelial cells using lepirudin anticoagulated human whole blood. We found that
cholesterol crystals caused a marked and dose-dependent increase in the adhesion 
molecules E-selectin and ICAM-1 on the surface of the endothelial cells after
incubation with whole blood. There was no activation of the cells when the
crystals were incubated in medium alone, or in human serum, despite substantial
crystal-induced complement activation in serum. Complement inhibitors at the C3
and C5 levels reduced the whole blood induced endothelial cell activation by up
to 89% (p<0.05) and abolished TNF release (p<0.01). Finally, the TNF inhibitor
infliximab reduced endothelial activation to background levels (p<0.05). In
conclusion, these data demonstrate that endothelial activation by cholesterol
crystals is mediated by complement-dependent TNF release, and suggests that
complement-inhibition might have a role in alleviating atherosclerosis-induced
inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25053140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Jun 9;13(2):4260-6. doi: 10.4238/2014.June.9.11.

Correlation of serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 in
patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Wang XH(1), Liu SQ(2), Wang YL(2), Jin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Liaocheng People's Hospital, Liaocheng, Shandong,
China xiaohuawangcn@163.com. (2)Department of Cardiology, Liaocheng People's
Hospital, Liaocheng, Shandong, China.

Serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) is a sensitive indicator of
inflammation, which is closely related with the progress of plaque formation.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is one of the inflammatory markers of local coronary plaque 
and the peripheral blood cycle, promoting the occurrence of atherosclerosis
development and plaque rupture. In this study, the correlation of hs-CRP and IL-6
was investigated in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Sixty cases of
ACS, including 33 cases of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and 27 cases of
unstable angina pectoris (UAP), 45 cases of stable angina pectoris (SAP), and 45 
healthy people (HG) were enrolled in study. The serum hs-CRP and serum IL-6
levels were tested by the immune turbidimetric method and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), respectively. The differences among groups and their
correlations were evaluated. Results showed that the serum hs-CRP and IL-6
concentrations of the AMI and UAP groups were significantly higher than those of 
the SAP and HG groups, respectively (P<0.01), and those of the AMI group were
significantly higher than those of the UAP group (P<0.05). The serum hs-CRP and
IL-6 levels of the ACS group were positively correlated (r=0.836). The serum
hs-CRP and IL-6 levels could be used to determine the stability of plaque, and
have some relevance in the ACS process, showing great value in judgments of ACS
prognosis.

PMID: 25036169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Sep;34(9):2143-50. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303414. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Impaired fibrous repair: a possible contributor to atherosclerotic plaque
vulnerability in patients with type II diabetes.

Edsfeldt A(1), Gonçalves I(2), Grufman H(2), Nitulescu M(2), Dunér P(2),
Bengtsson E(2), Mollet IG(2), Persson A(2), Nilsson M(2), Orho-Melander M(2),
Melander O(2), Björkbacka H(2), Nilsson J(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit (A.E., I.G., H.G., M.N.,
P.D., E.B., A.P., M.N., H.B., J.N.) and Department of Clinical Sciences (I.G.M., 
M.O.-M., O.M.), Clinical Research Center, Clinical Sciences, Lund University,
Malmö, Sweden; and Department of Cardiology-Coronary Diseases, Skåne University
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden (A.E., I.G., H.G., A.P., M.N.).
Andreas.edsfeldt@med.lu.se. (2)From the Experimental Cardiovascular Research Unit
(A.E., I.G., H.G., M.N., P.D., E.B., A.P., M.N., H.B., J.N.) and Department of
Clinical Sciences (I.G.M., M.O.-M., O.M.), Clinical Research Center, Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; and Department of Cardiology-Coronary
Diseases, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden (A.E., I.G., H.G., A.P.,
M.N.).

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes mellitus (DM) type II is increasing rapidly worldwide.
Patients with DM II have a greater atherosclerotic burden and higher risk of
developing cardiovascular complications. Inflammation has been proposed as the
main cause for the high risk of atherosclerotic disease in DM II. In this study, 
we compared markers of inflammation and fibrous repair in plaques from subjects
with and without DM II.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Carotid endarterectomy specimens were obtained from 63
patients with and 131 without DM. Plaque structure, connective tissue proteins,
inflammatory cells, and markers were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, ELISA,
Mesoscale, and Luminex technology. Carotid plaques from diabetics had lower
levels of extracellular matrix proteins, elastin, and collagen, which are
critical for plaque stability. Plaques from diabetics had reduced levels of
platelet-derived growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-2, both important for
tissue repair. No differences were observed in inflammatory markers in plaques
from diabetic and nondiabetic patients.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that atherosclerotic plaques in subjects with DM 
II are more prone to rupture because of impaired repair responses rather than to 
increased vascular inflammation. Although this study did not have a mechanistic
design, our findings suggest that targeting impaired repair responses in carotid 
plaques may help to increase our understanding of atherosclerotic plaque
development and vulnerability in patients with DM II.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25035341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Sep;34(9):2135-42. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303950. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Plasma neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalinin in the general population:
association with inflammation and prognosis.

Lindberg S(1), Jensen JS(2), Mogelvang R(2), Pedersen SH(2), Galatius S(2),
Flyvbjerg A(2), Magnusson NE(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cardiology P, Gentofte University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark (S.L., J.S.J., R.M., S.H.P., S.G.); Copenhagen City Heart Study,
Bispebjerg University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (S.L., J.S.J., R.M.);
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark (J.S.J.); The Medical Research Laboratory,
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (A.F.,
N.E.M.); and Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark (A.F., N.E.M.). soerenli@hotmail.com. (2)From the
Department of Cardiology P, Gentofte University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark
(S.L., J.S.J., R.M., S.H.P., S.G.); Copenhagen City Heart Study, Bispebjerg
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (S.L., J.S.J., R.M.); Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark (J.S.J.); The Medical Research Laboratory, Department of
Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (A.F., N.E.M.); and
Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark (A.F., N.E.M.).

OBJECTIVE: Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is a glycoprotein
stored in granules of neutrophil leukocytes participating in inflammatory and
atherosclerotic processes and possibly plaque rupture. Despite the putative role 
of NGAL in atherosclerosis and acute myocardial infarction, human studies of
plasma NGAL are still limited.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We prospectively followed 5599 randomly selected men and
women from the community in the fourth Copenhagen Heart Study. Plasma NGAL was
measured at study entry. Participants were followed for 10 years. During
follow-up, 20% died (n=1120) and 15% (n=884) developed a major adverse
cardiovascular event. Plasma NGAL associated strongly with all inflammatory
markers (high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, total leukocyte count, neutrophil
count) and inversely with estimated glomerular filtration rate (all, P<0.001).
Multivariate analysis identified neutrophil leukocyte count as the main
determinant of plasma NGAL. During follow-up, participants with increasing NGAL
had increased risk of all-cause mortality and major adverse cardiovascular event 
(both, P<0.001). Even after adjustment for confounding risk factors by Cox
regression analysis, NGAL remained an independent predictor of both all-cause
mortality and major adverse cardiovascular event. When added to the Framingham
risk score, NGAL improved c-statistics and correctly reclassified ≈15% into more 
appropriate risk groups. In comparison with high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, 
when both markers were added to the Framingham risk score, NGAL conferred 3× to
4× the risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma NGAL is strongly associated with inflammation in the general 
population. NGAL independently associated with 10-year outcome, and when added to
the Framingham risk score, NGAL both improves c-statistics and correctly
reclassifies participants into more accurate risk categories.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24969771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(40):6299-305.

Combination of statin plus renin angiotensin system inhibition for the prevention
or the treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.

Athyros VG, Katsiki N, Karagiannis A, Mikhailidis DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free Hospital Campus, University
College London Medical School, University College London (UCL), Pond Street,
London NW3 2QG, UK. MIKHAILIDIS@aol.com.

Statins effectively reduce cardiovascular disease (CVD) morbidity and mortality. 
However, even after low-density lipoprotein cholesterol goal attainment there is 
a residual CVD risk. To reduce this risk, combining statins with drugs acting on 
the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) was investigated. The GREek Atorvastatin and
Coronary-heart-disease Evaluation (GREACE), Japanese Coronary Artery Disease
(JCAD), Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT) and The Assessing the
Treatment Effect in Metabolic Syndrome Without Perceptible Diabetes (ATTEMPT)
trials suggest that the statin plus RAS inhibition combination reduces CVD events
more than a statin alone and considerably more than RAS inhibition alone. This
benefit seems to be related to effects on endothelial function, vascular
inflammation and the initiation, progression and rupture of atheromatous plaques.
These effects are, at least in part, driven by mediators, the microRNAs (miRs),
that are implicated in the pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of
atherosclerosis (e.g. restoration of endothelial function and attenuation of
vascular inflammation). Some miRs are favourably affected by statins and others
by RAS inhibition. There is a miR family (miR-146a/b), related to coronary artery
plaque destabilization that is beneficially affected by both statins and RAS
inhibition. Statins and RAS inhibition combination should be routinely prescribed
in high risk patients with CVD, hypertension, obesity, metabolic syndrome, and/or
diabetes to maximize clinical benefit.

PMID: 24953400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Aug;34(8):1668-73. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303209. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Factor XI regulates pathological thrombus formation on acutely ruptured
atherosclerotic plaques.

van Montfoort ML(1), Kuijpers MJ(1), Knaup VL(1), Bhanot S(1), Monia BP(1),
Roelofs JJ(1), Heemskerk JW(1), Meijers JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Experimental Vascular Medicine (M.L.v.M., V.L.K.,
J.C.M.M.) and Pathology (J.J.T.H.R.), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular
Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The
Netherlands (M.J.E.K., J.W.M.H.); Department of Antisense Drug Discovery, Isis
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Carlsbad, CA (S.B., B.P.M.); and Department of Plasma
Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (J.C.M.M.). (2)From the
Departments of Experimental Vascular Medicine (M.L.v.M., V.L.K., J.C.M.M.) and
Pathology (J.J.T.H.R.), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
(M.J.E.K., J.W.M.H.); Department of Antisense Drug Discovery, Isis
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Carlsbad, CA (S.B., B.P.M.); and Department of Plasma
Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (J.C.M.M.).
j.c.meijers@amc.uva.nl.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Aug;34(8):1607-8.

OBJECTIVE: Coagulation factor XI is proposed as therapeutic target for
anticoagulation. However, it is still unclear whether the antithrombotic
properties of factor XI inhibitors influence atherosclerotic disease and
atherothrombosis. Our aim is to investigate whether factor XI antisense
oligonucleotides could prevent thrombus formation on acutely ruptured
atherosclerotic plaques.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Atherosclerotic plaques in the carotid arteries of
Apoe(-/-) mice were acutely ruptured using ultrasound. The subsequent thrombus
formation was visualized and quantified by intravital microscopy and
immunohistochemistry. Mice were pretreated with either factor XI antisense or
nonsense oligonucleotides (50 mg/kg) to lower factor XI plasma levels. A tail
bleeding assay was used to determine the safety. On plaque rupture, initial
platelet adhesion and platelet plug formation were not impaired in animals
treated with factor XI antisense oligonucleotides. However, the ensuing thrombus 
formation and fibrin deposition were significantly lower after 5 to 10 minutes
(P<0.05) in factor XI antisense oligonucleotide-treated animals without inducing 
a bleeding tendency. Furthermore, thrombi from antisense-treated animals were
less stable than thrombi from placebo-treated animals. Moreover, macrophage
infiltration and collagen deposition were lower in the carotid arteries of factor
XI antisense-treated animals. No neutrophils were present.
CONCLUSIONS: Factor XI antisense oligonucleotides safely prevent thrombus
formation on acutely ruptured atherosclerotic plaques in mice. Furthermore,
perturbed carotid arteries from factor XI antisense-treated animals show a less
severe inflammatory response.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24947525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014 Aug;48(2):118-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2014.05.015.
Epub 2014 Jun 16.

Identification of patients with a histologically unstable carotid plaque using
ultrasonic plaque image analysis.

Salem MK(1), Bown MJ(2), Sayers RD(3), West K(4), Moore D(4), Nicolaides A(5),
Robinson TG(6), Naylor AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
Electronic address: ms447@le.ac.uk. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK; NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical 
Research Unit, Leicester, UK. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK. (4)Department of Histopathology,
University Hospitals Leicester, Leicester, UK. (5)Department of Surgery, St
George's University of London, London, UK; University of Nicosia Medical School, 
Nicosia, Cyprus. (6)NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit,
Leicester, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014 Dec;48(6):714-5.

OBJECTIVES: In patients with carotid stenosis the risk of stroke is highest in
the first few days after onset of symptoms and it is low in asymptomatic
patients. The ability to identify patients with a high (or low) probability of
having a histologically unstable plaque might become a complimentary method that 
can refine the indications for surgical intervention.
METHODS: Two histopathologists, using validated American Heart Association
criteria, independently graded plaques harvested during carotid endarterectomy.
Preoperative Duplex images were independently assessed for juxtaluminal black
area, plaque type, plaque area, and grey-scale median (GSM) following image
normalization. Logistic regression analysis was then performed to create a model 
for predicting predominantly histologically unstable or stable plaques.
RESULTS: A total of 126 patients were included in the study. Based on the
presence and extent of histological features including haemorrhage, thrombus,
fibrous tissue, lipid core, inflammation, neovascularity, foam cells, and cap
rupture, 39 plaques were graded as predominantly stable, while 87 were
predominantly unstable. Unstable plaques were associated with a plaque area >95
mm(2) (OR 4.15; 95% CI 1.34-12.8 p = .009), a juxtaluminal black area >6 mm(2)
(OR 2.77; 95% CI 1.24 to 6.17 p = .01) and a GSM <25 (OR 3.76; 95% CI
1.14-12.39). Logistic regression indicated that patients with the first two
features had a 90% probability of having a histologically unstable plaque. The
model was used to calculate the probability of having an unstable plaque in each 
patient. The receiver operating characteristic curve using the p value was 0.68
(95% CI 0.59-0.78).
CONCLUSIONS: Computerized plaque analysis has the potential to identify patients 
with histologically unstable carotid plaques. This model requires validation, but
offers the potential to influence patient selection for emergency interventions
and the monitoring of medical therapy.

Copyright © 2014 European Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24947079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. MBio. 2014 Jun 10;5(3):e01206-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01206-14.

Bacteria present in carotid arterial plaques are found as biofilm deposits which 
may contribute to enhanced risk of plaque rupture.

Lanter BB(1), Sauer K(1), Davies DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, New
York, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University,
Binghamton, New York, USA dgdavies@binghamton.edu.

Atherosclerosis, a disease condition resulting from the buildup of fatty plaque
deposits within arterial walls, is the major underlying cause of ischemia
(restriction of the blood), leading to obstruction of peripheral arteries,
congestive heart failure, heart attack, and stroke in humans. Emerging research
indicates that factors including inflammation and infection may play a key role
in the progression of atherosclerosis. In the current work, atherosclerotic
carotid artery explants from 15 patients were all shown to test positive for the 
presence of eubacterial 16S rRNA genes. Density gradient gel electrophoresis of 5
of these samples revealed that each contained 10 or more distinct 16S rRNA gene
sequences. Direct microscopic observation of transverse sections from 5 diseased 
carotid arteries analyzed with a eubacterium-specific peptide nucleic acid probe 
revealed these to have formed biofilm deposits, with from 1 to 6 deposits per
thin section of plaque analyzed. A majority, 93%, of deposits was located
proximal to the internal elastic lamina and associated with fibrous tissue. In 6 
of the 15 plaques analyzed, 16S rRNA genes from Pseudomonas spp. were detected.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms have been shown in our lab to undergo a
dispersion response when challenged with free iron in vitro. Iron is known to be 
released into the blood by transferrin following interaction with catecholamine
hormones, such as norepinephrine. Experiments performed in vitro showed that
addition of physiologically relevant levels of norepinephrine induced dispersion 
of P. aeruginosa biofilms when grown under low iron conditions in the presence
but not in the absence of physiological levels of transferrin.IMPORTANCE: The
association of bacteria with atherosclerosis has been only superficially studied,
with little attention focused on the potential of bacteria to form biofilms
within arterial plaques. In the current work, we show that bacteria form biofilm 
deposits within carotid arterial plaques, and we demonstrate that one species we 
have identified in plaques can be stimulated in vitro to undergo a biofilm
dispersion response when challenged with physiologically relevant levels of
norepinephrine in the presence of transferrin. Biofilm dispersion is
characterized by the release of bacterial enzymes into the surroundings of
biofilm microcolonies, allowing bacteria to escape the biofilm matrix. We believe
these enzymes may have the potential to damage surrounding tissues and facilitate
plaque rupture if norepinephrine is able to stimulate biofilm dispersion in vivo.
This research, therefore, suggests a potential mechanistic link between hormonal 
state and the potential for heart attack and stroke.

Copyright © 2014 Lanter et al.

PMCID: PMC4056553
PMID: 24917599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014 Aug;11(8):443-57. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2014.80. Epub 2014 
Jun 10.

PET imaging of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

Tarkin JM(1), Joshi FR(1), Rudd JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Box 110,
Addenbrooke's Centre for Cardiovascular Investigation, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 
2QQ, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015 Feb;12(2):79.
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015 Feb;12(2):79.

PET imaging of atherosclerosis can quantify several in vivo pathological
processes occurring within the arterial system. (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is
the most-commonly used PET tracer, with well-established roles in atherosclerosis
imaging. In this context, the (18)F-FDG signal largely reflects tracer uptake by 
plaque macrophages and, therefore, inflammation with smaller contributions from
other resident cell types. As a marker of plaque vulnerability, the (18)F-FDG PET
signal can be used to help to identify patients at the highest risk of clinical
events. (18)F-FDG PET has also been used successfully as a surrogate end point in
clinical trials of antiatherosclerotic therapies. Nonetheless, imaging
atherosclerosis with (18)F-FDG has several limitations. Most importantly,
coronary artery imaging is problematic because (18)F-FDG accumulates in all cells
that metabolize glucose, and background myocardial uptake is generally greater
than any signal originating from a plaque. To help to overcome these limitations,
several novel PET tracers, which might be more-specifically targeted than
(18)F-FDG, have been tested in atherosclerosis imaging. These tracers are
designed to track inflammation, hypoxia, neoangiogenesis, or active
calcification, which are all precursors to plaque rupture and its clinical
sequelae.

PMID: 24913061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Circ Res. 2014 Jun 6;114(12):1852-66. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721.

Mechanisms of plaque formation and rupture.

Bentzon JF(1), Otsuka F(1), Virmani R(1), Falk E(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Clinical Medicine (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University,
and Department of Cardiology (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark; and CVPath Institute Inc, Gaithersburg, MD (F.O., R.V.). (2)From the
Department of Clinical Medicine (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University, and Department
of Cardiology (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark; and
CVPath Institute Inc, Gaithersburg, MD (F.O., R.V.). erling.falk@ki.au.dk.

Atherosclerosis causes clinical disease through luminal narrowing or by
precipitating thrombi that obstruct blood flow to the heart (coronary heart
disease), brain (ischemic stroke), or lower extremities (peripheral vascular
disease). The most common of these manifestations is coronary heart disease,
including stable angina pectoris and the acute coronary syndromes.
Atherosclerosis is a lipoprotein-driven disease that leads to plaque formation at
specific sites of the arterial tree through intimal inflammation, necrosis,
fibrosis, and calcification. After decades of indolent progression, such plaques 
may suddenly cause life-threatening coronary thrombosis presenting as an acute
coronary syndrome. Most often, the culprit morphology is plaque rupture with
exposure of highly thrombogenic, red cell-rich necrotic core material. The
permissive structural requirement for this to occur is an extremely thin fibrous 
cap, and thus, ruptures occur mainly among lesions defined as thin-cap
fibroatheromas. Also common are thrombi forming on lesions without rupture
(plaque erosion), most often on pathological intimal thickening or
fibroatheromas. However, the mechanisms involved in plaque erosion remain largely
unknown, although coronary spasm is suspected. The calcified nodule has been
suggested as a rare cause of coronary thrombosis in highly calcified and tortious
arteries in older individuals. To characterize the severity and prognosis of
plaques, several terms are used. Plaque burden denotes the extent of disease,
whereas plaque activity is an ambiguous term, which may refer to one of several
processes that characterize progression. Plaque vulnerability describes the
short-term risk of precipitating symptomatic thrombosis. In this review, we
discuss mechanisms of atherosclerotic plaque initiation and progression; how
plaques suddenly precipitate life-threatening thrombi; and the concepts of plaque
burden, activity, and vulnerability.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24902970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nucl Med Biol. 2014 Aug;41(7):562-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2014.04.085. Epub
2014 Apr 21.

Gene expression levels of matrix metalloproteinases in human atherosclerotic
plaques and evaluation of radiolabeled inhibitors as imaging agents for plaque
vulnerability.

Müller A(1), Krämer SD(2), Meletta R(2), Beck K(2), Selivanova SV(2), Rancic
Z(3), Kaufmann PA(4), Vos B(5), Meding J(5), Stellfeld T(5), Heinrich TK(5),
Bauser M(5), Hütter J(5), Dinkelborg LM(5), Schibli R(2), Ametamey SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: adrienne.mueller@pharma.ethz.ch. (2)Center for
Radiopharmaceutical Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Clinic for
Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (5)Global Drug Discovery, Bayer Healthcare, Berlin, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is the primary cause for myocardial 
infarction and stroke. During plaque progression macrophages and mast cells
secrete matrix-degrading proteolytic enzymes, such as matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs). We studied levels of MMPs and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3
(TIMP-3) in relation to the characteristics of carotid plaques. We evaluated in
vitro two radiolabeled probes targeting active MMPs towards non-invasive imaging 
of rupture-prone plaques.
METHODS: Human carotid plaques obtained from endarterectomy were classified into 
stable and vulnerable by visual and histological analysis. MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-8,
MMP-9, MMP-10, MMP-12, MMP-14, TIMP-3, and CD68 levels were investigated by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry was used to localize
MMP-2 and MMP-9 with respect to CD68-expressing macrophages. Western blotting was
applied to detect their active forms. A fluorine-18-labeled MMP-2/MMP-9 inhibitor
and a tritiated selective MMP-9 inhibitor were evaluated by in vitro
autoradiography as potential lead structures for non-invasive imaging.
RESULTS: Gene expression levels of all MMPs and CD68 were elevated in plaques.
MMP-1, MMP-9, MMP-12 and MMP-14 were significantly higher in vulnerable than
stable plaques. TIMP-3 expression was highest in stable and low in vulnerable
plaques. Immunohistochemistry revealed intensive staining of MMP-9 in vulnerable 
plaques. Western blotting confirmed presence of the active form in plaque
lysates. In vitro autoradiography showed binding of both inhibitors to stable and
vulnerable plaques.
CONCLUSIONS: MMPs differed in their expression patterns among plaque phenotypes, 
providing possible imaging targets. The two tested MMP-2/MMP-9 and MMP-9
inhibitors may be useful to detect atherosclerotic plaques, but not the
vulnerable lesions selectively.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Jul;235(1):140-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.04.022. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Coronary artery atherectomy reduces plaque shear strains: an endovascular
elastography imaging study.

Keshavarz-Motamed Z(1), Saijo Y(2), Majdouline Y(1), Riou L(3), Ohayon J(4),
Cloutier G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biorheology and Medical Ultrasonics, University of Montreal
Hospital Research Center (CRCHUM), Montréal, Québec, Canada. (2)Graduate School
of Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; Department of
Cardiology, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (3)INSERM, UMR_S 1039, Bioclinical 
Radiopharmaceutic, Faculty of Medicine, University Joseph-Fourier, Grenoble,
France. (4)Laboratory TIMC-IMAG/DyCTiM, University Joseph-Fourier, CNRS UMR 5525,
Grenoble, France; University of Savoie, Polytech Annecy-Chambery, Le Bourget du
Lac, France. (5)Laboratory of Biorheology and Medical Ultrasonics, University of 
Montreal Hospital Research Center (CRCHUM), Montréal, Québec, Canada; Department 
of Radiology, Radio-Oncology and Nuclear Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Montreal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. Electronic
address: guy.cloutier@umontreal.ca.

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2014 Oct;236(2):351-2.

Mechanical response and properties of the arterial wall can be used to identify
the biomechanical instability of plaques and predict their vulnerability to
rupture. Shear strain elastography (SSE) is proposed to identify vulnerable
plaque features attributed to mechanical structural heterogeneities. The aims of 
this study were: 1) to report on the potential of SSE to identify atherosclerotic
plaques; and 2) to use SSE maps to highlight biomechanical changes in lesion
characteristics after directional coronary atherectomy (DCA) interventions. For
this purpose, SSE was imaged using in vivo intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)
radio-frequency data collected from 12 atherosclerotic patients before and after 
DCA intervention. Coronary atherosclerotic plaques (pre-DCA) showed high SSE
magnitudes with large affected areas. There were good correlations between SSE
levels and soft plaque content (i.e., cellular fibrosis, thrombosis and fibrin)
(mean |SSE| vs. soft plaque content: r = 0.82, p < 0.01). Significant differences
were noticed between SSE images before and after DCA. Stable arteries (post-DCA) 
exhibited lower values than pre-DCA vessels (e.g., pre-DCA: mean |SSE| = 3.9 ±
0.2% vs. 1.1 ± 0.2% post-DCA, p < 0.001). Furthermore, SSE magnitude was
statistically higher in plaques with a high level of inflammation (e.g., mean
|SSE| had values of 4.8 ± 0.4% in plaques with high inflammation, whereas it was 
reduced to 1.8 ± 0.2% with no inflammation, p < 0.01). This study demonstrates
the potential of the IVUS-based SSE technique to detect vulnerable plaques in
vivo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835433  [PubMed - in process]


91. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Jul 1;174(3):503-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.04.071. Epub 
2014 Apr 13.

Towards non-invasive imaging of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques by targeting
co-stimulatory molecules.

Müller A(1), Mu L(2), Meletta R(3), Beck K(3), Rancic Z(4), Drandarov K(3),
Kaufmann PA(5), Ametamey SM(3), Schibli R(6), Borel N(7), Krämer SD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences of ETH Zurich, Center for
Radiopharmaceutical Sciences ETH-PSI-USZ, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic
address: adrienne.mueller@pharma.ethz.ch. (2)Department of Nuclear Medicine,
University Hospital Zurich, Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences ETH-PSI-USZ, 
Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences of ETH
Zurich, Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences ETH-PSI-USZ, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)University Hospital Zurich, Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery, Zurich,
Switzerland. (5)University Hospital Zurich, Department of Nuclear Medicine,
Cardiac Imaging, Zurich, Switzerland. (6)Department of Chemistry and Applied
Biosciences of ETH Zurich, Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences ETH-PSI-USZ,
Zurich, Switzerland; Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Zurich, 
Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences ETH-PSI-USZ, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Institute for Veterinary Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Myocardial infarction and stroke are the life-threatening
consequences after plaque rupture in coronary or carotid arteries. Positron
emission tomography employing [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose can visualize plaque
inflammation; however, the question remains whether this is specific for plaque
vulnerability. The pathophysiology of vulnerable plaques suggests several
molecular processes. Here, we propose the co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 
as potential new targets for non-invasive imaging.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human atherosclerotic segments were obtained from carotid
endarterectomy and classified into stable and vulnerable plaques. We identified
CD80 and CD86 with significantly higher mRNA levels in vulnerable than stable
plaques. CD80+ and CD86+ cells were found in spatial proximity to CD83+ dendritic
cells and CD68+ macrophages of atherosclerotic plaques. As a proof of
target-expression we labeled a low molecular weight ligand, which has a high
affinity for human CD80, with carbon-11 to perform in vitro autoradiography with 
human plaque slices. We observed 3-fold higher binding to vulnerable than stable 
plaques, demonstrating a first approach towards discriminating between the two
plaque types. Positron emission tomography studies showed accumulation in CD80+
Raji xenografts, low radioactivity in myocardium and rapid clearance from the
blood pool in mice.
CONCLUSION: In human carotid arteries, the co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86
show significantly higher expression levels in vulnerable compared to stable
plaques. With the novel CD80-specific radiotracer we are able to discriminate
between stable and vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques in vitro. This is an
important step towards non-invasive imaging of the life-threatening vulnerable
lesions in humans.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24834996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Circ J. 2014;78(6):1302-10. Epub 2014 May 9.

Positron emission tomography-computed tomography for imaging of inflammatory
cardiovascular diseases.

Miyagawa M(1), Yokoyama R, Nishiyama Y, Ogimoto A, Higaki J, Mochizuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine.

Inflammation is a determinant of atherosclerotic plaque rupture, the event
usually responsible for myocardial infarction and stroke. Possible causes of
inflammatory cardiomyopathy include myocarditis, eosinophilic disease, and
sarcoidosis. Although conventional imaging techniques can identify the site and
severity of luminal stenosis, they do not provide information regarding
inflammatory status. (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography 
(PET) for imaging of inflammatory cardiovascular diseases has been rapidly
evolving. Integrated PET/computed tomography (CT) is becoming the method of
choice for quantification of arterial inflammation across multiple vessels.
Moreover, PET/CT provides information about the activation status of inflammatory
cells in the vessel wall, thus allowing early diagnosis and risk stratification
of patients. The Japanese health insurance system approved reimbursement for
FDG-PET use to detect inflammation sites in cardiac sarcoidosis as of April 2012.
This approval has necessitated a more detailed assessment of the clinical value
of FDG-PET. Standardized preparation, imaging, and image interpretation protocols
should be established to sufficiently suppress physiological FDG uptake in the
normal myocardium, and thereby facilitate detection of early-stage cardiac
inflammatory lesions with more favorable specificity. This review summarizes the 
background, clinical utility, state-of-the-art advances, and potential future
applications of FDG-PET for imaging inflammatory cardiovascular diseases
including cardiac sarcoidosis, large-vessel arteritis, and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 24817762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Mar 20;2014:285058. doi: 10.1155/2014/285058.
eCollection 2014.

Atherosclerosis and atheroma plaque rupture: normal anatomy of vasa vasorum and
their role associated with atherosclerosis.

Sun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medical Imaging, Department of Imaging and Applied Physics,
Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia.

Atherosclerosis is primarily a degenerative disorder related to aging with a
chronic inflammatory component. There are differences in expression among
different vascular beds, inflicting a range of vascular diseases. The majority of
studies focus on the inner and medial vascular layers, which are affected at the 
development of atherosclerosis. Recent evidence shows that the outer layer of
blood vessels, composed of the adventitial layer and the vasa vasorum, not only
plays a significant role in maintaining vessel integrity, but also reacts to
atheroma. What is not clear is the extent of contribution of the outer layer to
the process of atherosclerosis. Is it involved in the initiation, progression,
and clinical expression of atheroma? Is the inflammation associated with atheroma
limited to being merely reactive or is there a proactive element? This paper
provides an overview of the normal anatomy of vasa vasorum and potential
mechanism of plaque formation due to vascular injury (vasa vasorum) and
microhemorrhage.

PMCID: PMC3980984
PMID: 24790560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jul 15;103(2):324-36. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu115. Epub 2014 Apr
29.

Insulin resistance aggravates atherosclerosis by reducing vascular smooth muscle 
cell survival and increasing CX3CL1/CX3CR1 axis.

Martínez-Hervás S(1), Vinué A(2), Núñez L(2), Andrés-Blasco I(2), Piqueras L(2), 
Real JT(1), Ascaso JF(1), Burks DJ(3), Sanz MJ(4), González-Navarro H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Clínico Universitario de
Valencia , Valencia 46010, Spain Institute of Health Research-INCLIVA, Avd.
Blasco Ibáñez, 17, Valencia 46010, Spain Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de
Valencia, Valencia, Spain CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas 
(CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Institute of Health Research-INCLIVA, Avd.
Blasco Ibáñez, 17, Valencia 46010, Spain. (3)CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación
Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. (4)Institute of Health Research-INCLIVA, Avd.
Blasco Ibáñez, 17, Valencia 46010, Spain Departamento de Farmacología,
Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain. (5)Institute of Health
Research-INCLIVA, Avd. Blasco Ibáñez, 17, Valencia 46010, Spain CIBER de Diabetes
y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain gonzaleh@uv.es.

AIMS: Insulin resistance (IR) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease
and atherosclerosis. Life-threatening acute events are mainly due to rupture of
unstable plaques, and the role of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in this
process in IR, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic syndrome (T2DM/MetS) has
not been fully addressed. Therefore, the role of VSMC survival in the generation 
of unstable plaques in T2DM/MetS and the involvement of inflammatory mediators
was investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Defective insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2)-mediated
signalling produced insulin-resistant VSMCs with reduced survival, migration, and
higher apoptosis than control cells. Silencing of IRS2 or inhibition of the V-akt
murine thymomaviral oncogene homologue kinase (AKT)-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent pathway in VSMCs augmented expression of 
the inflammatory chemokine fractalkine (CX3CL1) and its receptor CX3CR1,
previously involved in atheroma plaque vulnerability. Interestingly, treatment of
VSMCs with CX3CL1 promoted apoptosis in the presence of other stimuli or when the
AKT pathway was blocked. Analysis of a mouse model of IR-MetS and accelerated
atherosclerosis, apoE-/-Irs2+/- mice, showed reduced VSMC survival, unstable
plaques, and up-regulation of CX3CL1/CX3CR1 axis compared with apoE-/- mice.
Human studies showed augmented soluble CX3CL1 plasma levels and CX3CR1 expression
in monocytes from IR-MetS subjects compared with controls. A positive correlation
between insulin levels, homeostatic model assessment (HOMA) index, carotid
atherosclerosis, and CX3CR1 mRNA levels was also found in all patients.
CONCLUSION: IR increases plaque vulnerability by augmenting the CX3CL1/CX3CR1
axis, which is mechanistically linked to reduced VSMC survival. Thus, modulation 
of IRS2-dependent signalling emerges as a potential therapeutic strategy to
promote VSMC survival and atheroma plaque stability and to reduce inflammatory
mediators in IR-MetS.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2014. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24788416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Jun;234(2):352-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.03.021. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Activated platelets promote increased monocyte expression of CXCR5 through
prostaglandin E2-related mechanisms and enhance the anti-inflammatory effects of 
CXCL13.

Halvorsen B(1), Smedbakken LM(2), Michelsen AE(2), Skjelland M(3), Bjerkeli V(2),
Sagen EL(2), Taskén K(4), Bendz B(5), Gullestad L(6), Holm S(7), Biessen EA(8),
Aukrust P(9).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: Bente.Halvorsen@rr-research.no. (2)Research
Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Oslo University Hospital Ullevål,
Oslo, Norway; Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway, Nordic EMBL Partnership and
Biotechnology Centre, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway; Biotechnology Centre, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammation
Research Center, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of Cardiology,
Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. (6)Department of
Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (7)Research Institute of
Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Pathology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht,
University of Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands. (9)Research Institute of
Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Section
of Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammation Research Center, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that the homeostatic chemokine CXCL13 is
up-regulated in monocytes in atherosclerosis, mediating anti-apoptotic and
anti-inflammatory effects.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulation of CXCL13s receptor, CXCR5.
METHODS/PATIENTS: In vitro studies in THP-1 and primary monocytes and studies of 
CXCR5 expression in thrombus material obtained at the site of plaque rupture
during myocardial infarction (MI).
RESULTS: Our major findings were: (i) toll-like receptor agonists and
particularly β-adrenergic receptor activation and releasate from
thrombin-activated platelets increased CXCR5 mRNA levels in monocytes. (ii) The
platelet-mediated induction of CXCR5 involved prostaglandin E2/cAMP/protein
kinase A-dependent as well as RANTES-dependent pathways with NFκB activation as a
potential common down-stream mediator. (iii) Releasate from thrombin-activated
platelets augmented the anti-inflammatory effects of CXCL13 in monocytes at least
partly by enhancing the effects of CXCL13 on CXCR5 expression. (iv) We found
strong immunostaining of CXCR5 in thrombus material obtained at the site of
plaque rupture in patients with ST elevation MI (STEMI) and in unstable carotid
lesions, co-localized with platelets.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that platelet-mediated signaling through CXCR5
may be active in vivo during plaque destabilization, potentially representing a
counteracting mechanism to inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24732574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Contemp Clin Trials. 2014 May;38(1):121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2014.03.009. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Vulnerable blood in high risk vascular patients: study design and methods.

McDermott MM(1), Greenland P(2), Liu K(2), Tian L(3), Green D(4), Shah SJ(4),
Huffman M(5), Wilkins J(5), Kibbe M(6), Liao Y(2), Huang CC(2), Skelly C(7),
Jacobs C(8), McCarthy W(8), Auerbach A(4), Lloyd-Jones D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
United States; Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, United States. Electronic address:
mdm608@northwestern.edu. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, United States. (3)Stanford University, United 
States. (4)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, United States. (5)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, United States; Department of Preventive
Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, United States.
(6)Department of Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
United States; Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Hospital, United States.
(7)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago Hospitals, United States.
(8)Department of Surgery, Rush Medical Center, United States.

BACKGROUND: Basic research suggests that rapid increases in circulating
inflammatory and hemostatic blood markers may trigger or indicate impending
plaque rupture and coronary thrombosis, resulting in acute ischemic heart disease
(IHD) events. However, these associations are not established in humans.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Biomarker Risk Assessment in Vulnerable Outpatients
(BRAVO) Study will determine whether levels of inflammatory and hemostatic
biomarkers rapidly increase during the weeks prior to an acute IHD event in
people with lower extremity peripheral artery disease (PAD). The BRAVO Study will
determine whether biomarker levels measured immediately prior to an IHD event are
higher than levels not preceding an IHD event; whether participants who
experience an IHD event (cases) have higher biomarker levels immediately prior to
the event and higher biomarker levels at each time point leading up to the IHD
event than participants without an IHD event (controls); and whether case
participants have greater increases in biomarkers during the months leading up to
the event than controls. BRAVO enrolled 595 patients with PAD, a population at
high risk for acute IHD events. After a baseline visit, participants returned
every two months for blood collection, underwent an electrocardiogram to identify
new silent myocardial infarctions, and were queried about new hospitalizations
since their prior study visit. Mortality data were also collected. Participants
were followed prospectively for up to three years.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAVO results will provide important information about the
pathophysiology of IHD events and may lead to improved therapies for preventing
IHD events in high-risk patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4082976
PMID: 24721480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Ageing Res Rev. 2014 Sep;17:68-78. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2014.03.005. Epub 2014 Mar 
27.

MicroRNAs in vascular aging and atherosclerosis.

Menghini R(1), Stöhr R(1), Federici M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.
Electronic address: federicm@uniroma2.it.

Lipid dysfunction, inflammation, immune response and advanced aging are major
factors involved in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. MicroRNAs 
(miRNAs) have emerged as important regulators of gene expression that post
transcriptionally modify cellular responses and function. MiRNA's are crucially
involved in several vascular pathologies which show a clear association with
increasing age (Dimmeler and Nicotera, 2013). Several studies have demonstrated
that miRNA dysregulation has a crucial role in the development of atherosclerotic
disease, encompassing every step from plaque formation to destabilization and
rupture. This review will present the recent advances in the elucidation of the
complex pathophysiological mechanisms in vascular aging by which miRNAs regulate 
the different phases of atherosclerotic process with a focus on endothelial cells
and both, innate and adaptive immune systems. Furthermore, the future areas of
research and potential clinical strategies will be discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24681293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Nucl Cardiol. 2014 Jun;21(3):553-62. doi: 10.1007/s12350-014-9879-3. Epub 2014 
Mar 14.

Atherosclerotic plaque uptake of a novel integrin tracer ¹⁸F-Flotegatide in a
mouse model of atherosclerosis.

Su H(1), Gorodny N, Gomez LF, Gangadharmath UB, Mu F, Chen G, Walsh JC,
Szardenings K, Berman DS, Kolb HC, Tamarappoo BK.

Author information: 
(1)Siemens Molecular Imaging, 6140 Bristol Parkway, Culver City, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Rupture of unstable atherosclerotic plaque that leads to stroke and
myocardial infarction may be induced by macrophage infiltration and neovessel
formation. A tracer that selectively binds to integrin αvβ3 a protein expressed
by macrophages and neovascular endothelium may identify rupture prone plaque.
METHODS: (18)F-labeled "R-G-D" containing tripeptide (Flotegatide), a click
chemistry derived radiotracer that binds to integrin αvβ3 was injected in ApoE
knockout mice fed a high fat diet. Uptake of Flotegatide by atherosclerotic
plaque was visualized by micro-PET, autoradiography, and correlated to histologic
markers of inflammation and angiogenesis.
RESULTS: We found that Flotegatide preferentially binds to aortic plaque in an
ApoE knockout mouse model of atherosclerosis. The tracer's uptake is strongly
associated with presence of histologic markers for macrophage infiltration and
integrin expression. There is a weaker but detectable association between
Flotegatide uptake and presence of an immunohistochemical marker for
neovascularization.
DISCUSSION: We hypothesize that Flotegatide may be a useful tracer for
visualization of inflamed plaque in clinical subjects with atherosclerosis and
may have potential for detecting vulnerable plaque.

PMCID: PMC4316660
PMID: 24627345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Med. 2014 Jun 19;20:230-7. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2013.00162.

Increased expression and activation of absent in melanoma 2 inflammasome
components in lymphocytic infiltrates of abdominal aortic aneurysms.

Dihlmann S(1), Erhart P(1), Mehrabi A(2), Nickkholgh A(2), Lasitschka F(3),
Böckler D(1), Hakimi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Chronic vascular inflammation is a key hallmark in the pathogenesis of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm (AAA). Recent investigations have suggested that the
inflammasome, a cytosolic multiprotein complex that recognizes
pathogen-associated molecular patterns, plays a role in atherosclerosis. However,
its role in AAA inflammation has not yet been investigated. This pilot study
analyzed inflammasome activation and its intramural localization in 24 biopsy
samples from 11 patients with asymptomatic AAA versus 12 aortic samples from
apparently healthy controls. Using a histological inflammation scale, we
identified grade 2/3 inflammatory changes with lymphoid aggregates/tertiary
lymphoid organs in 21 out of 24 AAA samples, whereas only 7 of the 12 control
samples exhibited local grade 1 inflammatory changes. Strong expression levels of
"apoptosis-associated speck-like protein with a caspase recruitment domain"
(ASC), caspase-1, caspase-5 and "absent in melanoma 2" (AIM2) were detected by
immunohistochemistry in both sporadic infiltrating lymphoid cells and lymphoid
aggregates located in the outer media and adventitia of AAA samples. In contrast,
inflammasome-positive cells were restricted to cholesterol plaque-associated
areas and to single infiltrating cells in control aortas. Analysis of gene
expression using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) revealed significantly
increased median mRNA levels of the inflammasome core components PYCARD (ASC),
CASP1 (Caspase-1) and IL1B (IL-1β) in AAA tissue compared with normal aorta.
Moreover, significantly increased median amounts of AIM2 protein and mature
caspase-5 (p20) were found in samples associated with high rupture risk compared 
with paired low rupture risk samples of the same AAA patient. We conclude from
our data that AAA-associated lymphoid cells are capable of inflammasome
signaling, suggesting that inflammasome activation is involved in the chronic
inflammatory process driving AAA progression.

PMCID: PMC4069270
PMID: 24618883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 5;9(3):e90563. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090563. eCollection 
2014.

Selective inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway regulates autophagy of
macrophage and vulnerability of atherosclerotic plaque.

Zhai C(1), Cheng J(1), Mujahid H(1), Wang H(1), Kong J(1), Yin Y(1), Li J(1),
Zhang Y(1), Ji X(1), Chen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Macrophage infiltration contributes to the instability of atherosclerotic
plaques. In the present study, we investigated whether selective inhibition of
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway can enhance the stability of atherosclerotic
plaques by activation of macrophage autophagy. In vitro study, selective
inhibitors or siRNA of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways were used to treat the rabbit's
peritoneal primary macrophage cells. Inflammation related cytokines secreted by
macrophages were measured. Ultrastructure changes of macrophages were examined by
transmission electron microscope. mRNA or protein expression levels of autophagy 
related gene Beclin 1, protein 1 light chain 3 II dots (LC3-II) or Atg5-Atg12
conjugation were assayed by quantitative RT-PCR or Western blot. In vivo study,
vulnerable plaque models were established in 40 New Zealand White rabbits and
then drugs or siRNA were given for 8 weeks to inhibit the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathway. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was performed to observe the plaque
imaging. The ultrastructure of the abdominal aortic atherosclerosis lesions were 
analyzed with histopathology. RT-PCR or Western blot methods were used to measure
the expression levels of corresponding autophagy related molecules. We found that
macrophage autophagy was induced in the presence of Akt inhibitor, mTOR inhibitor
and mTOR-siRNA in vitro study, while PI3K inhibitor had the opposite role. In
vivo study, we found that macrophage autophagy increased significantly and the
rabbits had lower plaque rupture incidence, lower plaque burden and decreased
vulnerability index in the inhibitors or siRNA treated groups. We made a
conclusion that selective inhibition of the Akt/mTOR signal pathway can reduce
macrophages and stabilize the vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques by promoting
macrophage autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3944201
PMID: 24599185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2014 Mar 4;16:22. doi: 10.1186/1532-429X-16-22.

Imaging of carotid artery vessel wall edema using T2-weighted cardiovascular
magnetic resonance.

Bloch LØ(1), Hansen AY, Pedersen SF, Honge JL, Kim WY, Hansen ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby,
Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
LARS.OLGAARD.BLOCH@STUDMED.AU.DK.

BACKGROUND: Atherothrombosis remains a major health problem in the western world,
and carotid atherosclerosis is an important contributor to embolic ischemic
strokes. It remains a clinical challenge to identify rupture-prone
atherosclerotic plaques before clinical events occur. Inflammation, endothelial
injury and angiogenesis are features of vulnerable plaques and may all be
associated with plaque edema. Therefore, vessel wall edema, which can be detected
by 2D T2-weighted cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR), may be used as a
dynamic marker of disease activity in the atherosclerotic plaque. However, 2D
imaging is limited by low spatial resolution in the slice-select direction
compared to 3D imaging techniques. We sought to investigate the ability of novel 
3D techniques to detect edema induced in porcine carotid arteries by acute
balloon injury compared to conventional 2D T2-weighted black-blood CMR.
METHODS: Edema was induced unilaterally by balloon overstretch injury in the
carotid artery of nine pigs. Between one to seven hours (average four hours) post
injury, CMR was performed using 2D T2-weighted short-tau inversion recovery
(T2-STIR), 3D volumetric isotropic turbo spin echo acquisition (VISTA) and 3D T2 
prepared gradient-echo (T2prep-GE). The CMR images were compared in terms of
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and contrast-to-noise (CNR) ratio. Furthermore, the
presence of vessel wall injury was validated macroscopically by means of Evans
Blue dye that only enters the injured vessel wall.
RESULTS: All three imaging sequences classified the carotid arteries correctly
compared to Evans Blue and all sequences demonstrated a significant increase in
SNR of the injured compared to the non-injured carotid vessel wall (T2-STIR,
p = 0.002; VISTA, p = 0.004; and T2prep-GE, p = 0.003). There was no significant 
difference between sequences regarding SNR and CNR.
CONCLUSION: The novel 3D imaging sequences VISTA and T2prep-GE perform comparably
to conventional 2D T2-STIR in terms of detecting vessel wall edema. The improved 
spatial coverage of these 3D sequences may facilitate visualization of vessel
wall edema to enable detection and monitoring of vulnerable carotid
atherosclerotic plaques.

PMCID: PMC3973999
PMID: 24593873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Antivir Ther. 2014;19(8):805-11. doi: 10.3851/IMP2756. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

HDL redox activity is increased in HIV-infected men in association with
macrophage activation and non-calcified coronary atherosclerotic plaque.

Zanni MV(1), Kelesidis T, Fitzgerald ML, Lo J, Abbara S, Wai B, Marmarelis E,
Hernandez NJ, Yang OO, Currier JS, Grinspoon SK.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Program in Nutritional Metabolism, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. mzanni@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: HIV is associated with atherosclerosis and low high-density
lipoprotein (HDL). With inflammation, HDL becomes dysfunctional. We previously
showed that proinflammatory HDL has high HDL redox activity (HRA). In this study,
we compare HRA in HIV-infected versus non-HIV-infected subjects and relate HRA to
indices of macrophage activation and cardiovascular disease risk.
METHODS: 102 HIV-infected subjects and 41 matched non-HIV controls without
clinical cardiovascular disease underwent coronary CT angiography (CTA) and
testing for immune/inflammatory biomarkers. The effect of purified HDL from each 
study subject on the oxidation rate of dihydrorhodamine-123 (DOR) was normalized 
to the DOR of pooled HDL from healthy subjects. The normalized ratio DOR
subject/DOR pooled was used as a measure of HRA, with higher HRA suggesting
dysfunctional HDL.
RESULTS: HRA was higher in HIV-infected versus non-HIV subjects (1.4 ±0.01 versus
1.3 ±0.01, P=0.03). In multivariate modelling for HRA among all subjects, HIV
status remained positively related to HRA (P=0.02), even after controlling for
traditional cardiovascular risk factors, comorbid conditions and immune
activation. Among HIV-infected subjects, HRA correlated inversely with HDL
(rho=-0.32, P=0.002) and log adiponectin (r=-0.28, P=0.006), and correlated
positively with log sCD163 (r=0.24, P=0.02) - a monocyte/macrophage activation
marker - and with the percentage of non-calcified coronary atherosclerotic plaque
(r=0.29, P=0.03). sCD163 remained significantly associated with HRA in
multivariate modelling among HIV-infected subjects (P=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate increased HRA among HIV-infected subjects
versus matched non-HIV subjects with comparable HDL levels. In HIV-infected
subjects, HRA relates to macrophage activation and to non-calcified coronary
atherosclerotic plaque, which may be rupture-prone. Further studies are needed in
HIV-infected patients to elucidate the interplay between immune activation, HDL
function and CVD risk.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT 00455793.

PMCID: PMC4423391
PMID: 24535655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Apr;233(2):551-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.12.019. Epub 2014 Jan 18.

Local carotid atherosclerotic plaque proteins for the identification of
circulating biomarkers in coronary patients.

Malaud E(1), Merle D(1), Piquer D(1), Molina L(1), Salvetat N(1), Rubrecht L(1), 
Dupaty E(1), Galea P(1), Cobo S(1), Blanc A(1), Saussine M(2), Marty-Ané C(2),
Albat B(2), Meilhac O(3), Rieunier F(4), Pouzet A(4), Molina F(1), Laune D(1),
Fareh J(5).

Author information: 
(1)UMR3145 CNRS Bio-Rad, SysDiag, Montpellier, France. (2)Vascular Surgery
Department, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, CHU Montpellier, France. (3)INSERM
U698, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France. (4)Bio-Rad Laboratories, Marnes la
Coquette, France. (5)UMR3145 CNRS Bio-Rad, SysDiag, Montpellier, France.
Electronic address: jeannette.fareh@sysdiag.cnrs.fr.

OBJECTIVE: To identify circulating biomarkers that originate from atherosclerotic
vulnerable plaques and that could predict future cardiovascular events.
METHODS: After a protein enrichment step (combinatorial peptide ligand library
approach), we performed a two-dimensional electrophoresis comparative analysis on
human carotid plaque protein extracts (fibrotic and hemorrhagic atherosclerotic
plaques). In silico analysis of the biological processes was applied on proteomic
data. Luminex xMAP assays were used to quantify inflammatory components in
carotid plaques. The systemic quantification of proteins originating from
vulnerable plaques in blood samples from patients with stable and unstable
coronary disease was evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 118 proteins are differentially expressed in fibrotic and
hemorrhagic plaques, and allowed the identification of three biological processes
related to atherosclerosis (platelet degranulation, vascular autophagy and
negative regulation of fibrinolysis). The multiplex assays revealed an increasing
expression of VEGF, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10 and RANTES in hemorrhagic as compared to
fibrotic plaques (p<0.05). Measurement of protein expressions in plasmas from
patients with stable and unstable coronary disease identified a combination of
biomarkers, including proteins of the smooth muscle cell integrity (Calponin-1), 
oxidative stress (DJ-1) and inflammation (IL-8), that allows the accurate
classification of patients at risk (p=0.0006).
CONCLUSION: Using tissue protein enrichment technology, we validated proteins
that are differentially expressed in hemorrhagic plaques as potential circulating
biomarkers of coronary patients. Combinations of such circulating biomarkers
could be used to stratify coronary patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Apr;233(2):467-77. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.01.036. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Advances in mechanisms, imaging and management of the unstable plaque.

Niccoli G(1), Liuzzo G(1), Montone RA(1), Crea F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Cardiology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: filippo.crea@rm.unicatt.it.

Post-mortem observations demonstrated that plaque fissure was the final event
leading to coronary thrombosis and occlusion in about two-thirds of cases of
sudden coronary death. Plaques prone to fissure have, therefore, been defined
"vulnerable plaques" and are identified by specific anatomic features including
thin inflamed fibrous cap, large lipidic core and positive remodeling.
Accordingly, elegant imaging modalities have been developed in order to identify 
this "holy grail". However, the results of prognostic studies based on the
identification of vulnerable plaques have not been encouraging because of the low
positive predictive value for major cardiovascular events. This observation is
not surprising as the pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes is complex and
multifactorial. In this review we propose a pathogenetic classification of acute 
coronary syndromes in the attempt to identify homogeneous groups of patients with
a common mechanism of coronary instability which can be identified by using
specific biomarkers and imaging techniques, and become a specific therapeutic
target.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Rev Port Cardiol. 2014 Feb;33(2):101-10. doi: 10.1016/j.repc.2013.07.017. Epub
2014 Feb 8.

The vulnerable plaque: current concepts and future perspectives on coronary
morphology, composition and wall stress imaging.

Silva Marques J(1), Pinto FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Santa Maria, Department of Cardiology I, Lisbon Academic
Medical Centre, CCUL, Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic address:
silvamarques.j@gmail.com. (2)University Hospital Santa Maria, Department of
Cardiology I, Lisbon Academic Medical Centre, CCUL, Lisbon, Portugal.

Cardiovascular imaging plays an important role in the identification and
characterization of the vulnerable plaque. A major goal is the ability to
identify individuals at risk of plaque rupture and developing an acute coronary
syndrome. Early recognition of rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques may lead to 
the development of pharmacologic and interventional strategies to reduce acute
coronary events. We review state-of-the-art cardiovascular imaging for
identification of the vulnerable plaque. There is ample evidence of a close
relationship between plaque morphology and patient outcome, but molecular imaging
can add significant information on tissue characterization, inflammation and
subclinical thrombosis. Additionally, identifying arterial wall exposed to high
shear stress may further identify rupture-prone arterial segments. These new
modalities may help reduce the individual, social and economic burden of
cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedade Portuguesa de Cardiologia. Published by Elsevier
España. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2014 Apr;16(4):401. doi: 10.1007/s11883-014-0401-9.

Pathophysiology of acute coronary syndrome.

Santos-Gallego CG(1), Picatoste B, Badimón JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Atherothrombosis Research Unit, The Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave Levy Place, Box
1030, New York, NY, 10029, USA.

Despite improvements in interventional and pharmacological therapy for
atherosclerotic disease, it is still the leading cause of death in the developed 
world. Hence, there is a need for further development of more effective
therapeutic approaches. This requires better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms and pathophysiology of the disease. Recent research in the last decade
has changed our view of acute coronary syndrome (ACS): from a mere lipid
deposition to an inflammatory disease; from ACS exclusively due to plaque rupture
to the novel definitions of plaque erosion or calcified nodule; from the notion
of a superimposed thrombus with necessary lethal consequences to the concept of
healed plaques and thrombus contributing to plaque progression. In the hope of
improving our understanding of ACS, all these recently discovered concepts are
reviewed in this article.

PMID: 24504549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Apr;18(4):721-34. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12221. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

Genetic deletion or TWEAK blocking antibody administration reduce atherosclerosis
and enhance plaque stability in mice.

Sastre C(1), Fernández-Laso V, Madrigal-Matute J, Muñoz-García B, Moreno JA,
Pastor-Vargas C, Llamas-Granda P, Burkly LC, Egido J, Martín-Ventura JL,
Blanco-Colio LM.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Patología Vascular, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.

Clinical complications associated with atherosclerotic plaques arise from luminal
obstruction due to plaque growth or destabilization leading to rupture. Tumour
necrosis factor ligand superfamily member 12 (TNFSF12) also known as TNF-related 
weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) is a proinflammatory cytokine that participates
in atherosclerotic plaque development, but its role in plaque stability remains
unclear. Using two different approaches, genetic deletion of TNFSF12 and
treatment with a TWEAK blocking mAb in atherosclerosis-prone mice, we have
analysed the effect of TWEAK inhibition on atherosclerotic plaques progression
and stability. Mice lacking both TNFSF12 and Apolipoprotein E (TNFSF12(-/-)
ApoE(-/-) ) exhibited a diminished atherosclerotic burden and lesion size in
their aorta. Advanced atherosclerotic plaques of TNFSF12(-/-) ApoE(-/-) or
anti-TWEAK treated mice exhibited an increase collagen/lipid and vascular smooth 
muscle cell/macrophage ratios compared with TNFSF12(+/+) ApoE(-/-) control mice, 
reflecting a more stable plaque phenotype. These changes are related with two
different mechanisms, reduction of the inflammatory response (chemokines
expression and secretion and nuclear factor kappa B activation) and decrease of
metalloproteinase activity in atherosclerotic plaques of TNFSF12(-/-) ApoE(-/-) .
A similar phenotype was observed with anti-TWEAK mAb treatment in TNFSF12(+/+)
ApoE(-/-) mice. Brachiocephalic arteries were also examined since they exhibit
additional features akin to human atherosclerotic plaques associated with
instability and rupture. Features of greater plaque stability including augmented
collagen/lipid ratio, reduced macrophage content, and less presence of lateral
xanthomas, buried caps, medial erosion, intraplaque haemorrhage and calcium
content were present in TNFSF12(-/-) ApoE(-/-) or anti-TWEAK treatment in
TNFSF12(+/+) ApoE(-/-) mice. Overall, our data indicate that anti-TWEAK treatment
has the capacity to diminish proinflamatory response associated with
atherosclerotic plaque progression and to alter plaque morphology towards a
stable phenotype.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4000122
PMID: 24479820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nat Med. 2014 Feb;20(2):215-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.3437. Epub 2014 Jan 12.

2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-mannose positron emission tomography imaging in
atherosclerosis.

Tahara N(1), Mukherjee J(2), de Haas HJ(3), Petrov AD(4), Tawakol A(5), Haider
N(4), Tahara A(6), Constantinescu CC, Zhou J, Boersma HH(7), Imaizumi T(6),
Nakano M(8), Finn A(9), Fayad Z(4), Virmani R(8), Fuster V(10), Bosca L(11),
Narula J(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. [2]. (2)1] [2]. (3)1] 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [2] University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
[3]. (4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (6)Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(7)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (8)CVPath Institute, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. (9)Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. (10)1] Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [2] Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (11)Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (Centro Mixto Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), Madrid, Spain.

Progressive inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques is associated with increasing
risk of plaque rupture. Molecular imaging of activated macrophages with
2-deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluoro-D-glucose ([(18)F]FDG) has been proposed for
identification of patients at higher risk for acute vascular events. Because
mannose is an isomer of glucose that is taken up by macrophages through glucose
transporters and because mannose receptors are expressed on a subset of the
macrophage population in high-risk plaques, we applied (18)F-labeled mannose
(2-deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluoro-D-mannose, [(18)F]FDM) for targeting of plaque
inflammation. Here, we describe comparable uptake of [(18)F]FDM and [(18)F]FDG in
atherosclerotic lesions in a rabbit model; [(18)F]FDM uptake was proportional to 
the plaque macrophage population. Our FDM competition studies in cultured cells
with 2-deoxy-2-[(14)C]carbon-D-glucose ([(14)C]2DG) support at least 35% higher
[(18)F]FDM uptake by macrophages in cell experiments. We also demonstrate that
FDM restricts binding of anti-mannose receptor antibody to macrophages by
approximately 35% and that mannose receptor targeting may provide an additional
avenue for imaging of plaque inflammation.

PMID: 24412923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Clin Med Insights Cardiol. 2015 Apr 19;8(Suppl 3):49-59. doi: 10.4137/CMC.S17068.
eCollection 2014.

Sex differences in inflammation during atherosclerosis.

Fairweather D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death in the United States and worldwide,
yet more men die from atherosclerosis than women, and at a younger age. Women, on
the other hand, mainly develop atherosclerosis following menopause, and
particularly if they have one or more autoimmune diseases, suggesting that the
immune mechanisms that increase disease in men are different from those in women.
The key processes in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis are vascular
inflammation, lipid accumulation, intimal thickening and fibrosis, remodeling,
and plaque rupture or erosion leading to myocardial infarction and ischemia.
Evidence indicates that sex hormones alter the immune response during
atherosclerosis, resulting in different disease phenotypes according to sex.
Women, for example, respond to infection and damage with increased antibody and
autoantibody responses, while men have elevated innate immune activation. This
review describes current knowledge regarding sex differences in the inflammatory 
immune response during atherosclerosis. Understanding sex differences is critical
for improving individualized medicine.

PMCID: PMC4405090
PMID: 25983559  [PubMed]


110. Theranostics. 2013 Nov 1;3(11):865-84. doi: 10.7150/thno.5771.

Molecular imaging of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

Wildgruber M(1), Swirski FK, Zernecke A.

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Radiology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Germany;

Acute rupture of vulnerable plaques frequently leads to myocardial infarction and
stroke. Within the last decades, several cellular and molecular players have been
identified that promote atherosclerotic lesion formation, maturation and plaque
rupture. It is now widely recognized that inflammation of the vessel wall and
distinct leukocyte subsets are involved throughout all phases of atherosclerotic 
lesion development. The mechanisms that render a stable plaque unstable and prone
to rupture, however, remain unknown and the identification of the vulnerable
plaque remains a major challenge in cardiovascular medicine. Imaging technologies
used in the clinic offer minimal information about the underlying biology and
potential risk for rupture. New imaging technologies are therefore being
developed, and in the preclinical setting have enabled new and dynamic insights
into the vessel wall for a better understanding of this complex disease.
Molecular imaging has the potential to track biological processes, such as the
activity of cellular and molecular biomarkers in vivo and over time. Similarly,
novel imaging technologies specifically detect effects of therapies that aim to
stabilize vulnerable plaques and silence vascular inflammation. Here we will
review the potential of established and new molecular imaging technologies in the
setting of atherosclerosis, and discuss the cumbersome steps required for
translating molecular imaging approaches into the clinic.

PMCID: PMC3841337
PMID: 24312156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Clin Apher. 2014 Oct;29(5):235-42. doi: 10.1002/jca.21311. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Lipoprotein apheresis reduces biomarkers of plaque destabilization and
cardiovascular risk.

Strauchmann J(1), Wallbach M, Bramlage C, Puls M, Konstantinides S, Mueller GA,
Koziolek MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, 
Germany.

Lipoprotein apheresis (LA) is believed to exert anti-atherosclerotic effects
beyond LDL-cholesterol reduction. We investigated 22 patients undergoing regular 
LA on a weekly basis (group A) before (AP) and after LA procedure (EP), 15
healthy individuals (group B), and 22 hyperlipoproteinemic patients with
concomitant cardiovascular end organ damage treated without LA therapy (group C).
Biomarkers of endothelial inflammation (hsCRP), plaque destabilization, and
rupture (sVCAM, MMP-9, PAPP-A, ADMA) were quantified. Intergroup comparison
revealed a statistically significant lower MMP-9 level in group A (AP and EP)
compared with group C (P < 0.01), whereas PAPP-A levels were lower in group B
compared with group A and C (P = 0.04). EP ADMA-levels and EP sVCAM levels in
group A were statistically lower compared with group B and C. AP and EP values
comparison revealed a significant reduction for hsCRP (mean 41.0 ± 16.7%,
P < 0.01), sVCAM (mean 69.6 ± 14.0%, P < 0.01), PAPP-A (mean 88.7 ± 20.4%,
P < 0.01), ADMA (mean 69.7 ± 18.4% P < 0.01). In conclusion, we observed a
transient decrease in the plasma concentrations of several biomarkers expressed
during plaque destabilization and elevated cardiovascular risk after a single LA 
treatment.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24281903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Dec;231(2):323-33. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.09.035. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Coronary and carotid atherosclerosis: how useful is the imaging?

Ibrahimi P(1), Jashari F, Nicoll R, Bajraktari G, Wester P, Henein MY.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre and Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.

The recent advancement of imaging modalities has made possible visualization of
atherosclerosis disease in all phases of its development. Markers of subclinical 
atherosclerosis or even the most advanced plaque features are acquired by
invasive (IVUS, OCT) and non-invasive imaging modalities (US, MRI, CTA).
Determining plaques prone to rupture (vulnerable plaques) might help to identify 
patients at risk for myocardial infarction or stroke. The most accepted features 
of plaque vulnerability include: thin cap fibroatheroma, large lipid core,
intimal spotty calcification, positive remodeling and intraplaque
neovascularizations. Today, research is focusing on finding imaging techniques
that are less invasive, less radiation and can detect most of the vulnerable
plaque features. While, carotid atherosclerosis can be visualized using
noninvasive imaging, such as US, MRI and CT, imaging plaque feature in coronary
arteries needs invasive imaging modalities. However, atherosclerosis is a
systemic disease with plaque development simultaneously in different arteries and
data acquisition in carotid arteries can add useful information for prediction of
coronary events.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24267246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;25(3):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2013.10.007.
Epub 2013 Nov 17.

Eyeballing cholesterol efflux and macrophage function in disease pathogenesis.

Sene A(1), Apte RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA;
Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
660 South Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. Electronic address:
apte@vision.wustl.edu.

Disorders of lipid metabolism are strongly associated with cardiovascular
disease. Recently, there has been significant focus on how tissues process lipid 
deposits. Impaired cholesterol efflux has been shown to be crucial in mediating
lipid deposition in atherosclerosis. The inability of macrophages to effectively 
efflux cholesterol from tissues initiates inflammation, plaque
neovascularization, and subsequent rupture. Recent studies suggest that inability
to effectively efflux cholesterol from tissues may have global implications far
beyond atherosclerosis, extending to the pathophysiology of unrelated diseases.
We examine the unifying mechanisms by which impaired cholesterol efflux
facilitates tissue-specific inflammation and disease progression in age-related
macular degeneration (AMD), a blinding eye disease, and in atherosclerosis, a
disease associated with significant cardiovascular morbidity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3943676
PMID: 24252662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Dec;13(10):1646-52.

Clinical assessment of carotid atherosclerosis inflammation by positron emission 
tomography.

Shalhoub J(1), Oskrochi Y, Davies AH, Owen DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Sciences, Department of Medicine, 5th Floor, Burlington
Danes Building, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0NN,
UK. d.owen@imperial.ac.uk.

Stroke caused by carotid atherosclerosis is a leading cause of mortality and the 
leading cause of disability in the developed world. For carotid plaques within
the neurovascular territory of a recent stroke or transient ischaemic attack,
surgical removal of the plaque (endarterectomy) has been clearly shown to reduce 
future cerebrovascular events. Management of asymptomatic plaques, however, is
less clear because only a minority of these plaques will ultimately become
symptomatic. Inflammation is a key feature which predicts whether a plaque is
likely to rupture and hence lead to stroke. By identifying inflammation in vivo, 
positron emission tomography (PET) may be able to identify high risk plaques.
This will allow clinicians to target intensive medical or surgical treatment to
high risk patients.

PMID: 24206129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Oct 29;4:162. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00162.

Immune mechanisms in atherosclerosis, especially in diabetes type 2.

Frostegård J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Immunology and Chronic Disease, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm , Sweden.

Atherosclerosis and ensuing cardiovascular disease (CVD) are major complications 
of diabetes type 2. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory condition involving
immunocompetent cells of different types present in the lesions. Even though
inflammation and immune activation may be more pronounced in atherosclerosis in
diabetes type 2, there does not appear to be any major differences between
diabetics and non-diabetics. Similar factors are thus implicated in
atherosclerosis-associated immune activation in both groups. The cause of immune 
activation is not known and different mutually non-exclusive possibilities exist.
Oxidized and/or enzymatically modified forms of low-density lipoprotein (OxLDL)
and dead cells are present in atherosclerotic plaques. OxLDL could play a role,
being pro-inflammatory and immunostimulatory as it activates T-cells and is
cytotoxic at higher concentrations. Inflammatory phospholipids in OxLDL are
implicated, with phosphorylcholine (PC) as one of the exposed antigens.
Antibodies against PC (anti-PC) are anti-atherogenic in mouse studies, and
anti-PC is negatively associated with development of atherosclerosis and CVD in
humans. Bacteria and virus have been discussed as potential causes of immune
activation, but it has been difficult to find direct evidence supporting this
hypothesis, and antibiotic trials in humans have been negative or inconclusive.
Heat shock proteins (HSP) could be one major target for atherogenic immune
reactions. More direct causes of plaque rupture include cytokines such as
interleukin 1β (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and also lipid mediators as 
leukotrienes. In addition, in diabetes, hyperglycemia and oxidative stress appear
to accelerate the development of atherosclerosis, one mechanism could be via
promotion of immune reactions. To prove that immune reactions are causative of
atherosclerosis and CVD, further studies with immune-modulatory treatments are
needed.

PMCID: PMC3810619
PMID: 24194733  [PubMed]


116. APMIS. 2014 Jun;122(6):556-64. doi: 10.1111/apm.12185. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

Inhibitory effect of co-administration of atorvastatin and endothelin-1 receptor 
antagonist on the progression of atherosclerosis in rabbit.

Sun Y(1), Liu J, Yang B, Sai X, Li T, Wang D, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China;
Department of Emergency, The Military General Hospital of Beijing PLA, Beijing,
China.

Atorvastatin, a hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitor, and endothelin-1
(ET-1) receptor antagonist have been separately indicated to ameliorate disease
progression in atherosclerosis. However, no study has evaluated the effect of
their combination on atherosclerosis. The objective of the current study was to
evaluate the direct in vivo effects of a combination regimen of atorvastatin and 
ET-1 receptor antagonist on male New Zealand white rabbit models of
atherosclerosis (injury-induced). Thirty-two atherosclerotic rabbits were divided
into four experimental groups: (a) injury group - fed high-fat diet; (b) ET-1
receptor antagonist preventive group - fed high-fat diet, but with intragastric
administration of the ET-1 receptor antagonist, darusentan; (c) combined
preventive group - fed high-fat diet, but with intragastric administration of
both darusentan and atorvastatin; and (d) treatment group - fed high-fat diet for
the first 8 weeks, followed by normal diet and intragastric administration of
both darusentan and atorvastatin up to 16 weeks. A further eight
non-atherosclerotic rabbits were fed normal diet and classified as the control
group. At the end of 8 and 16 weeks, compared with the injury group, the combined
preventive group had significant reduction in both the concentration of serum
lipids and inflammatory factors and atherosclerosis formation, indicative of a
multifaceted anti-atherosclerotic impact. The relative area of atherosclerotic
lesions in the injury group (30.84%) was significantly higher than the control
group (4.62%; p < 0.05). The combined preventive group showed a significantly
robust effect on lowering serum lipid, inflammatory cytokines, and maintained
homeostatic balance of free radicals, and important downstream effectors like
ET-1 and matrixmetalloproteinase-9. Our data show that atorvastatin and ET-1
receptor antagonist co-administration may decrease lipid levels, stabilize
plaques and relieve vascular inflammation. By reducing the plaque burden, this
regimen may minimize the risk of atherosclerotic plaque rupture or arterial
occlusion.

© 2013 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24164644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Eur Heart J. 2014 May;35(17):1137-46. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht402. Epub 2013
Oct 14.

Higher levels of advanced glycation endproducts in human carotid atherosclerotic 
plaques are associated with a rupture-prone phenotype.

Hanssen NM(1), Wouters K, Huijberts MS, Gijbels MJ, Sluimer JC, Scheijen JL,
Heeneman S, Biessen EA, Daemen MJ, Brownlee M, de Kleijn DP, Stehouwer CD,
Pasterkamp G, Schalkwijk CG.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University
Medical Centre (MUMC), Maastricht, The Netherland s.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2014 May;35(17):1095-7.

AIMS: Rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by inflammation and
a large necrotic core. Inflammation is linked to high metabolic activity.
Advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and their major precursor methylglyoxal are
formed during high metabolic activity and can have detrimental effects on
cellular function and may induce cell death. Therefore, we investigated whether
plaque AGEs are increased in human carotid rupture-prone plaques and are
associated with plaque inflammation and necrotic core formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The protein-bound major methylglyoxal-derived AGE
5-hydro-5-methylimidazolone (MG-H1) and N(ε)-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) were
measured in human carotid endarterectomy specimens (n = 75) with tandem mass
spectrometry. MG-H1 and CML levels were associated with rupture-prone plaques,
increased protein levels of the inflammatory mediators IL-8 and MCP-1 and with
higher MMP-9 activity. Immunohistochemistry showed that AGEs accumulated
predominantly in macrophages surrounding the necrotic core and co-localized with 
cleaved caspase-3. Intra-plaque comparison revealed that glyoxalase-1 (GLO-1),
the major methylglyoxal-detoxifying enzyme, mRNA was decreased (-13%, P < 0.05)
in ruptured compared with stable plaque segments. In line, in U937 monoctyes, we 
found reduced (GLO-1) activity (-38%, P < 0.05) and increased MGO (346%, P <
0.05) production after stimulation with the inflammatory mediator TNF. Direct
incubation with methylglyoxal increased apoptosis up to two-fold.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study showing that AGEs are associated with human
rupture-prone plaques. Furthermore, this study suggests a cascade linking
inflammation, reduced GLO-1, methylglyoxal- and AGE-accumulation, and subsequent 
apoptosis. Thereby, AGEs may act as mediators of the progression of stable to
rupture-prone plaques, opening a window towards novel treatments and biomarkers
to treat cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 24126878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Nov;231(1):48-53. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.08.024. Epub 2013 Aug 31.

Soluble ST2 levels are not associated with secondary cardiovascular events and
vulnerable plaque phenotype in patients with carotid artery stenosis.

Willems S(1), Quax PH, de Borst GJ, de Vries JP, Moll FL, de Kleijn DP, Hoefer
IE, Pasterkamp G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: s.willems-3@umcutrecht.nl.

OBJECTIVE: Soluble ST2 (sST2), a novel biomarker predictive for heart disease,
has recently been shown associated with the progression of atherosclerotic
disease in a mouse model. The present study was designed to assess sST2 plasma
levels in patients scheduled for carotid endarterectomy and relate it with the
occurrence of adverse cardiovascular events during follow-up. In addition, sST2
levels were associated to patient clinical data and atherosclerotic plaque
characteristics.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma sST2 levels were measured in 391 patients who
underwent carotid endarterectomy and were subsequently followed for 3 years.
Primary composite endpoint was the occurrence of an adverse cardiovascular event.
At baseline, no differences were observed in sST2 levels between asymptomatic (n 
= 75) and symptomatic (n = 316) patients (85 [49-122] versus 90 [58-137] pg/ml, p
= 0.263). Soluble ST2 plasma levels did not differ between patients who
experienced a secondary manifestation of cardiovascular disease and patients who 
remained free of symptoms (90 [60-129] versus 88 [46-140] pg/ml, p = 0.519).
There was no association between sST2 levels and any of the following plaque
characteristics: size of a lipid core, degree of calcification, number of
macrophages or smooth muscle cells, amount of collagen and number of
microvessels.
CONCLUSIONS: Soluble ST2 plasma levels have no predictive value for future
cardiovascular events in patients with significant carotid artery stenosis. In
addition, we did not observe an association between plasma sST2 levels and the
histopathological features of a rupture prone plaque. This study does not provide
supportive evidence that sST2 reflects a progressive state of advanced
atherosclerotic disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24125409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Nov;231(1):22-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.08.003. Epub 2013 Aug 15.

Chronic HCV infection is a risk factor of ischemic stroke.

Adinolfi LE(1), Restivo L, Guerrera B, Sellitto A, Ciervo A, Iuliano N, Rinaldi
L, Santoro A, Li Vigni G, Marrone A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery, Neurology, Geriatric and Metabolic Diseases, 
Second University of Naples, Internal Medicine of Clinic Hospital of Marcianise, 
ASL Caserta, Italy. Electronic address: luigielio.adinolfi@unina2.it.

OBJECTIVES: Cerebrovascular diseases are leading cause of death worldwide. Plaque
rupture and embolization account for one-third of ischemic stroke. The causes are
not fully known, but inflammation plays a pathogenic role. Recently, HCV
infection has been identify as risk of atherosclerosis. HCV replicates within
carotid plaques and brain endothelia cells; moreover, HCV patients showed higher 
levels of inflammation. Thus, we hypothesized that subjects carrying HCV are at
higher risk of stroke. Accordingly, we evaluated prevalence and role of HCV
infection in patients with stroke.
METHODS: A priori sample size was calculated. Overall, 820 consecutive patients
were enrolled, 123 with stroke and, as control, 697 age- and gender-matched (295 
with COPD; 402 with diseases other than HCV-associated). Patients were evaluated 
for HCV and conventional risk of stroke.
RESULTS: Prevalence of HCV was higher in patients with stroke than that observed 
in control (26.8% vs. 6.6%, p = 0.0001). An analysis of stroke patients showed
that those HCV positive were younger (p = 0.017) had lower serum levels of
cholesterol (p = 0.001), triglycerides (p = 0.045), and higher serum levels of
inflammation markers (ESR, p = 0.001; CRP, p = 0.0001; fibrinogen, p = 0.012). A 
multivariate analysis showed that HCV infection was an independent risk factor of
stroke (O.R. 2.04, 95% C.I. 1.69-2.46; p = 0.0001). A secondary analysis showed
that HCV patients had higher (p = 0.031) prevalence of past ischemic heart
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV infected patients are at higher and earlier risk of stroke.
Inflammation is a key mediator. Clinicians in clinical practice and researchers
in future trials should take into account these new findings.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24125405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Gac Med Mex. 2013 Sep-Oct;149(5):521-30.

[Tumor necrosis factor alfa in cardiovascular diseases: molecular biology and
genetics].

[Article in Spanish]

Fragoso Lona JM(1), Sierra Martínez M, Vargas Alarcón G, Barrios Rodas A, Ramírez
Bello J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología «Ignacio
Chávez», México, D.F. dr.julian.ramirez.inv@gmail.com.

Cardiovascular diseases are a major public health problem globally. In 1997,
cardiovascular disease caused 41% of deaths in the United States. It has been
reported that about 60 million people in the United States have some form of
cardiovascular disease. These entities are chronic conditions initiated by a
dysregulation of the immune response. One gene and its protein product -tumor
necrosis factor a (TNF-α)- a powerful pleiotropic cytokine with multiple cellular
functions, plays a role in the inflammation, initiation, development,
susceptibility, severity, and response to treatment, etc. of coronary artery
disease (CAD). The focus of the present review is to summarize recent evidence
showing the biological role of TNF-α in the initiation and progression of
endothelial dysfunction and complications of atherosclerosis, and as a genetic
variation of TNF-α confer susceptibility, severity, and treatment response in
CAD: ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction and non-ST segment elevation
myocardial infarction, unstable angina, and coronary restenosis.

PMID: 24108338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nanomedicine. 2014 Apr;10(3):639-49. doi: 10.1016/j.nano.2013.09.009. Epub 2013
Oct 5.

In vivo MRI detection of carotid atherosclerotic lesions and kidney inflammation 
in ApoE-deficient mice by using LOX-1 targeted iron nanoparticles.

Wen S(1), Liu DF(1), Cui Y(1), Harris SS(2), Chen YC(1), Li KC(3), Ju SH(1), Teng
GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key lab of Molecular and Functional Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Emory University/Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. (3)Department of Radiology, Wells Fargo Faculty
Scholar, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (4)Jiangsu Key
lab of Molecular and Functional Imaging, Department of Radiology, Zhongda
Hospital, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. Electronic
address: gjteng@vip.sina.com.

Lectin-like Oxidized Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor 1 (LOX-1) plays a key role 
in atherosclerotic plaque initiation, formation and rupture, as well as in
hyperlipidemia-induced glomerular disease. Here we report a sensitive, specific
and biocompatible LOX-1-targeted-USPIO for the noninvasive MR imaging of LOX-1
within carotid atherosclerotic lesions and glomerular disease in apoE-deficient
mice. In vitro analysis showed the highest uptake of targeted USPIOs in only
activated RAW264.7 macrophages, and in vivo MRI studies showed signal loss in
carotid atherosclerotic lesions after administration of targeted USPIOs at 8h and
24h. These areas of signal loss were correlated with the presence of
nanoparticles in the atherosclerotic lesions, and immunohistochemistry and Perl's
staining confirmed the co-localization of the LOX-1/macrophages/MMP-9 and
targeted nanoparticles. Finally, additional studies suggest that this targeted
probe may have potential to noninvasively image early glomerular disease. This
finding may provide important methods for characterizing vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaques and hyperlipidemia-induced glomerular diseases.FROM THE
CLINICAL EDITOR: A functionalized USPIO-based negative contrast material was used
in this study, demonstrating feasibility of sensitive MRI-based detection of
atherosclerotic plaque formation in the carotid arteries and in the renal cortex,
paving the way to potential future clinical applications.

© 2014.

PMID: 24103305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cardiovasc Hematol Disord Drug Targets. 2013 Aug;13(2):111-22.

Anti-apoptotic serpins as therapeutics in cardiovascular diseases.

Kuiper J(1), Quax PH, Bot I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biopharmaceutics, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden
University, Gorlaeus Laboratories, Einsteinweg 55, 2333 CC Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Acute cardiovascular syndromes such as myocardial infarction and stroke are a
major cause of death in the Western society and are generally caused by rupture
of an atherosclerotic plaque. Treatment of atherosclerosis, the main underlying
cause of acute cardiovascular syndromes, is still inadequate for most of the
patients. Therefore, there is a need for new therapeutic strategies in addition
to the existing lipid-lowering drugs such as statins. Lipid accumulation,
inflammation and matrix degradation are generally considered key processes in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and that of plaque rupture. Furthermore,
apoptosis or programmed cell death of plaque cells, depending on the disease
stage, is thought to be of importance in the development and progression of
atherosclerosis and the incidence of acute cardiovascular syndromes. Serine
protease inhibitors or so-called serpins have been demonstrated to be involved in
both the induction and inhibition of apoptosis and may thus be of interest as
therapeutics in cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis. In this review, 
we will discuss the current knowledge on the role of serpins in cardiovascular
diseases with particular emphasis on apoptotic cell death and the potential
therapeutic applications.

PMID: 23987999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2013 Oct;15(10):359. doi: 10.1007/s11883-013-0359-z.

Imaging atherosclerosis and risk of plaque rupture.

Osborn EA(1), Jaffer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Atherosclerosis imaging strategies can delineate characteristics of plaques at
risk of rupture and thrombosis. Structural plaque imaging identifies high-risk
plaque features, including lipid pools, thin fibrous caps, and intraplaque
hemorrhage. New molecular imaging techniques complement structural imaging
approaches by illuminating important features of plaque biology, with a prominent
focus on detecting inflammation as a high-risk phenotype. As we unravel the
molecular and structural characteristics underlying thrombosis-prone plaques,
there is significant promise for eventual early identification and prediction of 
atherosclerotic plaque complications before they occur. Here we focus on recent
imaging insights into high-risk arterial plaques, the etiologic agent of acute
myocardial infarction, stroke, and sudden cardiac death.

PMCID: PMC3816112
PMID: 23982263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Clin Ther. 2013 Aug;35(8):1099-107. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2013.07.332.

Targeting the unstable plaque in acute coronary syndromes.

Thompson PL(1), Nidorf SM, Eikelboom J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Institute, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, School of Medicine
and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia. peterlthompson@bigpond.com

BACKGROUND: Rupture or erosion of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque is the
typical pathology and usual cause of acute coronary syndromes. Despite detailed
understanding of the processes of lipid accumulation, thinning of the fibrous
cap, and inflammation leading to plaque instability, there are no strategies in
clinical use that uniquely target the unstable plaque.
OBJECTIVE: A critical review of recent publications on potential therapies that
could be used to stabilize unstable plaque.
METHODS: We searched PubMed, other literature databases, drug development sites, 
and clinical trial registries to retrieve clinical studies on anti-inflammatory
and lipid-modulating therapies that could be used to stabilize unstable
atherosclerotic plaque.
RESULTS: Multiple experimental targets involving lipid and inflammatory pathways 
have the potential to stabilize the plaque and expand the armamentarium against
coronary artery disease. Randomized clinical trials of darapladib, methotrexate, 
canakinumab, and colchicine are well advanced to establish if plaque
stabilization is feasible and effective in patients with acute coronary
syndromes.
CONCLUSIONS: Although there are still no agents in clinical use for plaque
stabilization, there are important advances in understanding plaque instability
and several encouraging approaches are being evaluated in Phase III clinical
trials.

© 2013 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23973042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Sep;230(1):33-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.06.018. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Specific somatostatin receptor II expression in arterial plaque: (68)Ga-DOTATATE 
autoradiographic, immunohistochemical and flow cytometric studies in
apoE-deficient mice.

Li X(1), Bauer W, Kreissl MC, Weirather J, Bauer E, Israel I, Richter D, Riehl G,
Buck A, Samnick S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Wuerzburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The rupture of atherosclerotic plaques is triggered by inflammation. 
Specific detection of inflammation is therefore the focus of many investigations.
Noninvasive imaging methods, such as positron emission tomography (PET), also are
suited for this purpose. (68)Ga-DOTATATE is a (68)Ga-labeled radiotracer with
specific affinity to somatostatin receptor subtype-2 (SSTR-2). SSTR-2 was found
specifically expressed on human macrophages/monocytes.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to confirm the distribution of SSTR-2 in inflammatory
plaques, and to assess its co-localization with macrophages within the plaques.
We also assessed (68)Ga-DOTATATE uptakes in plaques by autoradiography.
METHOD: Apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-/- mice on a high-cholesterol diet were injected 
with (68)Ga-DOTATATE. The animals were sacrificed and aorta sections were
examined using autoradiography and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, expression 
of SSTR-2 was analyzed by flow cytometry. Western blot was conducted to assess
SSTR-2 regulation in basal and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated state. To
evaluate the specificity of the (68)Ga-DOTATATE, the sections were pre-incubated 
with monoclonal SSTR-2 antibody before autoradiography.
RESULT: Autoradiographic imaging showed uptake of (68)Ga-DOTATATE co-localized
with the macrophage-rich plaques by immunohistochemical examination. A high
expression of SSTR-2 on macrophages was found by flow cytometry and western blot.
Stimulation with lipopolysaccharide did not alter expression of SSTR-2 in
macrophages.
CONCLUSION: Due to its specific binding to macrophages, (68)Ga-DOTATATE might be 
a suitable radiotracer for the evaluation of inflammatory activity in unstable
plaques.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23958249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e71089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071089. Print 2013.

Retinal vascular caliber is associated with cardiovascular biomarkers of
oxidative stress and inflammation: the POLA study.

Daien V(1), Carriere I, Kawasaki R, Cristol JP, Villain M, Fesler P, Ritchie K,
Delcourt C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Montpellier, France.

PURPOSE: Retinal vascular caliber has been linked with increased cardiovascular
risk and is predictive of cardiovascular pathology, including stroke and coronary
heart disease. Oxidative stress, as well as inflammatory mechanisms, plays a
major role in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis, plaque rupture
and vascular thrombotic propensity. The purpose of this study is to explore the
relationship between retinal vascular calibers and biomarkers of oxidative stress
and inflammation, in subjects free of cardiovascular pathology.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Cross-sectional analysis from a community-dwelling cohort
comprising 1224 individuals aged 60 years and over, without a history of coronary
or peripheral artery disease or stroke. Retinal vascular caliber was measured
from fundus photographs using semi-automated standardized imaging software.
Oxidative stress was evaluated using plasma superoxide dismutase 2 and
glutathione peroxidase (GPx-3) activities, and inflammatory state was assessed
using plasma high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and orosomucoid.
RESULTS: In a multivariate model controlling for cardiovascular risk factors,
larger retinal arteriolar caliber was independently related to higher level of
GPx-3 activity (p = 0.003) whereas larger venular caliber was associated with
higher levels of hsCRP (p = 0.0001) and orosomucoid (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: In the present study, biomarkers of oxidative stress regulation and
inflammation were independently associated with retinal vascular calibers. This
suggests that an assessment of retinal vessels may offer early and non-invasive
detection of subclinical vascular pathology.

PMCID: PMC3724806
PMID: 23923054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Oct;33(10):2432-43. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301743. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Profiling of atherosclerotic lesions by gene and tissue microarrays reveals PCSK6
as a novel protease in unstable carotid atherosclerosis.

Perisic L(1), Hedin E, Razuvaev A, Lengquist M, Osterholm C, Folkersen L,
Gillgren P, Paulsson-Berne G, Ponten F, Odeberg J, Hedin U.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery (L.P., E.H., A.R., M.L.,
C.O., U.H.), and Department of Medicine (G.P.-B., J.O.), Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Molecular Genetics, Novo Nordisk, Copenhagen,
Denmark (L.F.); Department of Surgery, Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden (P.G.); 
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden (F.P.); and Department of Proteomics, Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden (J.O.).

OBJECTIVE: Carotid plaque instability is a major cause of ischemic stroke, but
detailed knowledge about underlying molecular pathways is still lacking. Here, we
evaluated large-scale transcriptomic and protein expression profiling in a
biobank of carotid endarterectomies followed by characterization of identified
candidates, as a platform for discovery of novel proteins differentially
regulated in unstable carotid lesions.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Genes highly upregulated in symptomatic versus asymptomatic
plaques were selected from Affymetrix microarray analyses (n=127 plaques), and
tissue microarrays constructed from 34 lesions were assayed for 21 corresponding 
proteins by immunohistochemistry. Quantification of stainings demonstrated
differential expression of CD36, CD137, and DOCK7 (P<0.05) in unstable versus
stable lesions and the most significant upregulation of a proprotein convertase, 
PCSK6 (P<0.0001). Increased expression of PCSK6 in symptomatic lesions was
verified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (n=233), and the
protein was localized to smooth muscle α-actin positive cells and extracellular
matrix of the fibrous cap by immunohistochemistry. PCSK6 expression positively
correlated to genes associated with inflammation, matrix degradation, and
mitogens in microarrays. Stimulation of human carotid smooth muscle cells in
vitro with cytokines caused rapid induction of PCSK6 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Using a combination of transcriptomic and tissue microarray
profiling, we demonstrate a novel approach to identify proteins differentially
expressed in unstable carotid atherosclerosis. The proprotein convertase PCSK6
was detected at increased levels in the fibrous cap of symptomatic carotid
plaques, possibly associated with key processes in plaque rupture such as
inflammation and extracellular matrix remodeling. Further studies are needed to
clarify the role of PCSK6 in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 23908247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2013 Aug;5(4):166-81. doi: 10.1177/1759720X13491025.

Management of cardiovascular risk in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: evidence
and expert opinion.

van den Oever IA(1), van Sijl AM, Nurmohamed MT.

Author information: 
(1)Jan van Breemen Research Institute Reade, Amsterdam, Netherlands and
Department of Internal Medicine, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

The risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality is increased in rheumatoid
arthritis. The classical cardiovascular risk factors, including smoking,
hypertension, dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus, obesity
and physical inactivity do not appear to explain the excess cardiovascular risk
in rheumatoid arthritis, although they do contribute, albeit in a different way
or to a lesser extent, to rheumatoid arthritis in comparison with the general
population. A very important link between rheumatoid arthritis and cardiovascular
disease is inflammation as it plays a key role in all stages of atherosclerosis: 
from endothelial dysfunction to plaque rupture and thrombosis. It also has an
influence on and accentuates some traditional cardiovascular risk factors, such
as dyslipidaemia, obesity and insulin resistance. To date, the exact
pathophysiologic mechanism by which this relation between cardiovascular disease 
and rheumatoid arthritis can be explained is not completely clear. Cardiovascular
risk management in rheumatoid arthritis is mandatory. Unfortunately, the way this
should be done remains a point of discussion. In this review issues regarding
cardiovascular risk in rheumatoid arthritis and its management will be addressed,
according to evidence presented in the latest studies and our own
experience-based opinion.

PMCID: PMC3728982
PMID: 23904862  [PubMed]


129. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(14):2439-47.

Molecular imaging of vascular inflammation.

Tahara N, Tahara A, Honda A, Nitta Y, Kodama N, Yamagishi S, Imaizumi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardio-Vascular Medicine, Kurume
University School of Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.
ntahara@med.kurume-u.ac.jp.

Atherosclerosis and its thrombotic complications represent the major cause of
morbidity and mortality in the industrialized countries. Despite recent advances 
in the diagnosis and management of cardiovascular disease, a substantial number
of patients still die from acute coronary syndromes. Recently, atherosclerotic
plaque composition rather than the degree of arterial stenosis has been shown to 
reflect the plaque vulnerability, thus contributing to the pathogenesis of
cardiovascular disease. Vulnerable plaques have a large lipidrich necrotic core, 
a thin-fibrous cap and numerous inflammatory cells. Among them, macrophage
activation plays a central role in vascular inflammation and plaque instability
within the atherosclerosis, being strongly involved in acute coronary syndromes. 
Various morphologic features of plaque vulnerability have been described by
computed tomography angiography, magnetic resonance imaging, intravascular
ultrasound, and optical coherence tomography. Molecular imaging is the tool best 
suited for identifying metabolically active macrophages. Indeed, positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is capable of
identifying and quantifying vascular inflammation characterized by macrophage
activation within the atherosclerotic plaques. So, FDG-PET might be a feasible
clinical tool for detecting vulnerable plaques and evaluating the efficacy of
drugs in plaque instability. In this paper, we review the clinical utility of
FDG-PET imaging in identifying patients at risk of plaque rupture and resultantly
prone to cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 23844819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2013 Sep;17(9):707-12. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2013.0109.
Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Association of genetic polymorphisms in matrix metalloproteinase-9 and coronary
artery disease in the Chinese Han population: a case-control study.

Wu HD(1), Bai X, Chen DM, Cao HY, Qin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) plays an important role in
inflammation and matrix degradation involved in atherosclerosis and plaque
rupture. The T allele of rs3918242 has been reported to lead to a high promoter
activity and associate with the extent of coronary artery disease (CAD). And some
studies have reported that the G allele of rs17576 might be associated with CAD. 
The aim of this study was to assess the association between the polymorphisms of 
the MMP-9 gene and CAD in the Chinese Han population.
METHODS: This case-control study comprised 258 CAD cases and 153 controls from
the Chinese Han Population. The genomic DNA of MMP-9 was isolated from whole
blood. Polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism
was used to determine the rs3918242 and rs17576 genotypes in the MMP-9 gene and
the total serum levels of MMP-9 were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay in both case and control groups.
RESULTS: Analysis of MMP-9 gene polymorphisms showed that the frequencies of the 
T allele and CT+TT genotypes of rs3918242 were significantly higher in the case
group than in the control group (p<0.05). However, the distribution of variant
genotypes of rs17576 did not differ between the case and control groups (p>0.05).
The total serum level of MMP-9 was significantly higher in the case group than in
the control group (p<0.05). The subjects carrying T alleles in the CAD group had 
higher average serum MMP-9 levels compared with CC genotypes (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the single-nucleotide polymorphism of
rs3918242 in the MMP-9 gene is associated with CAD and high serum levels of MMP-9
are also associated with CAD in the Chinese Han population. Therefore, genetic
variation of rs3918242 may participate in the development of CAD through
influencing MMP-9 expression.

PMCID: PMC3761435
PMID: 23819814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Thromb Haemost. 2013 Oct;110(4):706-22. doi: 10.1160/TH13-02-0121. Epub 2013 Jun 
27.

The vulnerable coronary plaque: update on imaging technologies.

Rosa GM(1), Bauckneht M, Masoero G, Mach F, Quercioli A, Seitun S, Balbi M,
Brunelli C, Parodi A, Nencioni A, Vuilleumier N, Montecucco F.

Author information: 
(1)Fabrizio Montecucco, MD, PhD, Division of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Geneva University Hospital, Avenue de la Roseraie 64, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland,
Tel.: +41 22 372 71 92, Fax: +41 22 382 72 45, E-mail:
fabrizio.montecucco@unige.ch.

Several studies have been carried out on vulnerable plaque as the main culprit
for ischaemic cardiac events. Historically, the most important diagnostic
technique for studying coronary atherosclerotic disease was to determine the
residual luminal diameter by angiographic measurement of the stenosis. However,
it has become clear that vulnerable plaque rupture as well as thrombosis, rather 
than stenosis, triggers most acute ischaemic events and that the quantification
of risk based merely on severity of the arterial stenosis is not sufficient. In
the last decades, substantial progresses have been made on optimisation of
techniques detecting the arterial wall morphology, plaque composition and
inflammation. To date, the use of a single technique is not recommended to
precisely identify the progression of the atherosclerotic process in human
beings. In contrast, the integration of data that can be derived from multiple
methods might improve our knowledge about plaque destabilisation. The aim of this
narrative review is to update evidence on the accuracy of the currently available
non-invasive and invasive imaging techniques in identifying components and
morphologic characteristics associated with coronary plaque vulnerability.

PMID: 23803753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Circ Res. 2013 Jul 19;113(3):252-65. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301562. Epub
2013 Jun 7.

A novel mouse model of atherosclerotic plaque instability for drug testing and
mechanistic/therapeutic discoveries using gene and microRNA expression profiling.

Chen YC(1), Bui AV, Diesch J, Manasseh R, Hausding C, Rivera J, Haviv I, Agrotis 
A, Htun NM, Jowett J, Hagemeyer CE, Hannan RD, Bobik A, Peter K.

Author information: 
(1)Baker IDI Heart & Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

RATIONALE: The high morbidity/mortality of atherosclerosis is typically
precipitated by plaque rupture and consequent thrombosis. However, research on
underlying mechanisms and therapeutic approaches is limited by the lack of animal
models that reproduce plaque instability observed in humans.
OBJECTIVE: Development and use of a mouse model of plaque rupture that reflects
the end stage of human atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: On the basis of flow measurements and computational fluid
dynamics, we applied a tandem stenosis to the carotid artery of apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice on high-fat diet. At 7 weeks postoperatively, we observed
intraplaque hemorrhage in ≈50% of mice, as well as disruption of fibrous caps,
intraluminal thrombosis, neovascularization, and further characteristics
typically seen in human unstable plaques. Administration of atorvastatin was
associated with plaque stabilization and downregulation of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 and ubiquitin. Microarray profiling of mRNA and
microRNA (miR) and, in particular, its combined analysis demonstrated major
differences in the hierarchical clustering of genes and miRs among
nonatherosclerotic arteries, stable, and unstable plaques and allows the
identification of distinct genes/miRs, potentially representing novel therapeutic
targets for plaque stabilization. The feasibility of the described animal model
as a discovery tool was established in a pilot approach, identifying a
disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs 4 (ADAMTS4) and
miR-322 as potential pathogenic factors of plaque instability in mice and
validated in human plaques.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly described mouse model reflects human atherosclerotic
plaque instability and represents a discovery tool toward the development and
testing of therapeutic strategies aimed at preventing plaque rupture. Distinctly 
expressed genes and miRs can be linked to plaque instability.

PMID: 23748430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Jul 15;99(2):284-93. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt097. Epub 2013 May 
17.

Biomechanical factors and macrophages in plaque stability.

Seneviratne A(1), Hulsmans M, Holvoet P, Monaco C.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Imperial College London and University of
Oxford, 65 Aspenlea Road, London W6 8LH, UK.

Thin-cap fibroatheromas (TCFAs) or vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques are
considered a high-risk phenotype for acute cardiovascular events. TCFAs are
identified by a thin rupture-prone fibrous cap, a large necrotic core, and a high
content of leucocytes. Atherogenesis is dependent upon complex patterns of blood 
flow. Slow-flowing blood imposing low shear stress on the arterial wall
up-regulates inflammatory signalling in endothelial cells and leucocytes, and
modulates microRNAs to promote inflammation and monocyte recruitment. Hence, low 
shear stress is believed to promote conditions conducive to vulnerable plaque
development. In this review, we explore how biomechanical factors modulate
macrophage phenotype and plaque stability.

PMID: 23687352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2013 Jun;15(6):327. doi: 10.1007/s11883-013-0327-7.

Anti-inflammatory strategies for plaque stabilization after acute coronary
syndromes.

Baruch A(1), van Bruggen N, Kim JB, Lehrer-Graiwer JE.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech Research and Early Development, 1 DNA Way MS 453a, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2013 Dec;15(12):374.

Despite dramatic advances in standard of care, the risk of recurrent myocardial
infarction early after an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) remains high. This period
of elevated risk after a cardiovascular event is associated with an acute
inflammatory response. While post-ACS inflammation correlates with the risk for
recurrent events and is likely to play a causal role in this period, the precise 
pathophysiologic mechanisms have been unclear. Recent studies have proposed that 
the cardiac event itself activates the sympathetic nervous system to directly
mobilize hematopoietic stem cells to differentiate into inflammatory monocytes,
acutely infiltrate plaque, and lead to recurrent plaque rupture. Here, we
summarize the existing and emerging evidence implicating post-ACS activation of
systemic inflammation in the progression of atherosclerosis, and identify
possible targets for therapeutic intervention. We highlight experimental
therapies and ongoing clinical studies that will validate these targets.

PMID: 23636864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. BMC Med. 2013 May 1;11:117. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-117.

Immunity, atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.

Frostegård J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Unit of Immunology and Chronic Disease,
Nobels väg 13, Stockholm, Sweden. johan.frostegard@ki.se.

Atherosclerosis, the major cause of cardiovascular disease (CVD), is a chronic
inflammatory condition with immune competent cells in lesions producing mainly
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Dead cells and oxidized forms of low density
lipoproteins (oxLDL) are abundant. The major direct cause of CVD appears to be
rupture of atherosclerotic plaques. oxLDL has proinflammatory and
immune-stimulatory properties, causes cell death at higher concentrations and
contains inflammatory phospholipids with phosphorylcholine (PC) as an interesting
epitope. Antibodies against PC (anti-PC) may be atheroprotective, one mechanism
being anti-inflammatory. Bacteria and virus have been discussed, but it has been 
difficult to find direct evidence, and antibiotic trials have not been
successful. Heat shock proteins could be one major target for atherogenic immune 
reactions. More direct causes of plaque rupture include pro-inflammatory
cytokines, chemokines, and lipid mediators. To prove that inflammation is a cause
of atherosclerosis and CVD, clinical studies with anti-inflammatory and/or
immune-modulatory treatment are needed. The potential causes of immune reactions 
and inflammation in atherosclerosis and how inflammation can be targeted
therapeutically to provide novel treatments for CVD are reviewed.

PMCID: PMC3658954
PMID: 23635324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Circ Res. 2013 Jun 21;113(1):72-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301036. Epub 2013 
Apr 24.

Macrophage-derived matrix vesicles: an alternative novel mechanism for
microcalcification in atherosclerotic plaques.

New SE(1), Goettsch C, Aikawa M, Marchini JF, Shibasaki M, Yabusaki K, Libby P,
Shanahan CM, Croce K, Aikawa E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

RATIONALE: We previously showed that early calcification of atherosclerotic
plaques associates with macrophage accumulation. Chronic renal disease and
mineral imbalance accelerate calcification and the subsequent release of matrix
vesicles (MVs), precursors of microcalcification.
OBJECTIVE: We tested the hypothesis that macrophage-derived MVs contribute
directly to microcalcification.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Macrophages associated with regions of calcified vesicular
structures in human carotid plaques (n=136 patients). In vitro, macrophages
released MVs with high calcification and aggregation potential. MVs expressed
exosomal markers (CD9 and TSG101) and contained S100A9 and annexin V. Silencing
S100A9 in vitro and genetic deficiency in S100A9-/- mice reduced MV
calcification, whereas stimulation with S100A9 increased calcification potential.
Externalization of phosphatidylserine after Ca/P stimulation and interaction of
S100A9 and annexin V indicated that a phosphatidylserine-annexin V-S100A9
membrane complex facilitates hydroxyapatite nucleation within the
macrophage-derived MV membrane.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the novel concept that macrophages release
calcifying MVs enriched in S100A9 and annexin V, which contribute to accelerated 
microcalcification in chronic renal disease.

PMCID: PMC3703850
PMID: 23616621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Basic Res Cardiol. 2013 May;108(3):350. doi: 10.1007/s00395-013-0350-4. Epub 2013
Apr 23.

Dipeptidyl peptidases in atherosclerosis: expression and role in macrophage
differentiation, activation and apoptosis.

Matheeussen V(1), Waumans Y, Martinet W, Van Goethem S, Van der Veken P, Scharpé 
S, Augustyns K, De Meyer GR, De Meester I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Biochemistry, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the arterial wall leading
to coronary artery disease, stroke, and peripheral arterial disease. Along with
the discovery of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) as a therapeutic target in type 2 
diabetes, a role for DPP4 in atherosclerosis is emerging. However, until now the 
expression and role of other DPPs such as DPP8 and DPP9 in atherosclerosis is
completely unknown. In the present study, we first investigated DPP expression in
human atherosclerotic plaques. DPP4 could only be observed in endothelial cells
of plaque neovessels in half of the specimens. In contrast, DPP8 and DPP9 were
abundantly present in macrophage-rich regions of plaques. We then focused on DPP 
expression and function in macrophage differentiation, activation and apoptosis. 
DPP8/9 was responsible for most of the DPP activity in macrophages. During
monocyte to macrophage differentiation, DPP9 was upregulated both in
pro-inflammatory M1 (3.7 ± 0.3-fold increase) and anti-inflammatory M2
macrophages (3.7 ± 0.4-fold increase) whereas DPP8 expression remained unchanged.
Inhibition of DPP8/9 activity with compound 1G244 reduced activation of M1
macrophages (IL-6 88 ± 16 vs. 146 ± 19 pg/ml; TNFα 3.8 ± 1.0 vs. 6.6 ± 1.9 ng/ml 
in treated vs. untreated cells), but not of M2 macrophages. Likewise, DPP9
silencing reduced TNFα and IL-6 secretion, pointing to a DPP9-mediated effect of 
the inhibitor. DPP8/9 inhibition also enhanced macrophage apoptosis (15 ± 4 vs.
7 ± 3 % in untreated cells). Because pro-inflammatory macrophages play a key role
in atherogenesis, plaque rupture and subsequent infarction, DPP9 inhibition might
provide interesting therapeutic prospects in reducing atherosclerosis and/or in
the prevention of plaque rupture.

PMID: 23608773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1000:1-20. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-405-0_1.

Vascular proteomics.

Barderas MG(1), Vivanco F, Alvarez-Llamas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Physiopathology, SESCAM, Hospital Nacional de
Parapléjicos, Toledo, Spain.

Cardiovascular diseases constitute the largest of death in developed countries,
being atherosclerosis the major contributor. Atherosclerosis is a process of
chronic inflammation, characterized by the accumulation of lipids, cells, and
fibrous elements in medium and large arteries. There is a continuum in
atherosclerotic cardiovascular pathology that extends from the initial
endothelial damage to diseases such as angina, myocardial infarction, and stroke.
The extent of inflammation, proteolysis, calcification, and neovascularization
influences the development of advanced lesions (atheroma plaques) on the
arteries. Plaque rupture and the ensuing thrombosis cause the acute complications
of atherosclerosis, i.e., myocardial infarction and cerebral ischemia. Thus,
identification of early biomarkers of plaque unstability and susceptibility to
rupture is of capital importance in preventing acute events. In recent years
proteomics has been successfully applied to study proteins involved in these
pathological processes. Thus, proteomic studies have been carried out focusing on
different elements such as vascular tissues (arteries), artery layers, cells
looking at proteomes and secretomes, plasma/serum, exosomes, lipoproteins, and
metabolites. This chapter will provide an overview of latest advances in
proteomic studies of atherosclerosis and related vascular diseases.

PMID: 23585080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Feb 22;2(1):e000018. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.112.000018.

Aldosterone increases early atherosclerosis and promotes plaque inflammation
through a placental growth factor-dependent mechanism.

McGraw AP(1), Bagley J, Chen WS, Galayda C, Nickerson H, Armani A, Caprio M,
Carmeliet P, Jaffe IZ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

BACKGROUND: Aldosterone levels correlate with the incidence of myocardial
infarction and mortality in cardiovascular patients. Aldosterone promotes
atherosclerosis in animal models, but the mechanisms are poorly understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Aldosterone was infused to achieve pathologically relevant
levels that did not increase blood pressure in the atherosclerosis-prone
apolipoprotein E-knockout mouse (ApoE-/-). Aldosterone increased atherosclerosis 
in the aortic root 1.8±0.1-fold after 4 weeks and in the aortic arch 3.7±0.2-fold
after 8 weeks, without significantly affecting plaque size in the abdominal aorta
or traditional cardiac risk factors. Aldosterone treatment increased lipid
content of plaques (2.1±0.2-fold) and inflammatory cell content (2.2±0.3-fold),
induced early T-cell (2.9±0.3-fold) and monocyte (2.3±0.3-fold) infiltration into
atherosclerosis-prone vascular regions, and enhanced systemic inflammation with
increased spleen weight (1.52±0.06-fold) and the circulating cytokine RANTES
(regulated and normal T cell secreted; 1.6±0.1-fold). To explore the mechanism, 7
genes were examined for aldosterone regulation in the ApoE-/- aorta. Further
studies focused on the proinflammatory placental growth factor (PlGF), which was 
released from aldosterone-treated ApoE-/- vessels. Activation of the
mineralocorticoid receptor by aldosterone in human coronary artery smooth muscle 
cells (SMCs) caused the release of factors that promote monocyte chemotaxis,
which was inhibited by blocking monocyte PlGF receptors. Furthermore,
PlGF-deficient ApoE-/- mice were resistant to early aldosterone-induced increases
in plaque burden and inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: Aldosterone increases early atherosclerosis in regions of turbulent 
blood flow and promotes an inflammatory plaque phenotype that is associated with 
rupture in humans. The mechanism may involve SMC release of soluble factors that 
recruit activated leukocytes to the vessel wall via PlGF signaling. These
findings identify a novel mechanism and potential treatment target for
aldosterone-induced ischemia in humans.

PMCID: PMC3603255
PMID: 23525413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3847-69. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1289-1. Epub 
2013 Feb 21.

Inflammation and immune system interactions in atherosclerosis.

Legein B(1), Temmerman L, Biessen EA, Lutgens E.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Vascular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Cardiovascular
Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), University of Maastricht,
Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality worldwide,
accounting for 16.7 million deaths each year. The underlying cause of the
majority of CVD is atherosclerosis. In the past, atherosclerosis was considered
to be the result of passive lipid accumulation in the vessel wall. Today's
picture is far more complex. Atherosclerosis is considered a chronic inflammatory
disease that results in the formation of plaques in large and mid-sized arteries.
Both cells of the innate and the adaptive immune system play a crucial role in
its pathogenesis. By transforming immune cells into pro- and anti-inflammatory
chemokine- and cytokine-producing units, and by guiding the interactions between 
the different immune cells, the immune system decisively influences the
propensity of a given plaque to rupture and cause clinical symptoms like
myocardial infarction and stroke. In this review, we give an overview on the
newest insights in the role of different immune cells and subtypes in
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 23430000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2013 Mar;15(3):313. doi: 10.1007/s11926-012-0313-z.

Cholesterol crystals and inflammation.

Grebe A(1), Latz E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospitals Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
alena.grebe@uni-bonn.de

Chronic vascular inflammation is regarded as a crucial aspect of cardiovascular
disease. However, the elicitors of this inflammatory response in the vessel wall 
are currently not well understood. Excessive amounts of cholesterol, an abundant 
and fundamental lipid molecule in mammalian cells, can initiate the development
and progression of atherosclerosis. Accumulation of cholesterol in early
atherosclerotic lesions results in the formation of macrophage foam cells, and
crystalline cholesterol is found as a characteristic of advanced atherosclerotic 
plaques. Cholesterol crystals can activate the NLRP3 inflammasome, a
multimolecular signaling complex of the innate immune system, resulting in
caspase-1 mediated activation and secretion of proinflammatory interleukin-1
family cytokines. Furthermore, crystalline cholesterol is believed to induce
plaque rupture by physical disruption of the fibrous cap covering atherosclerotic
lesions. Here we review the effect of cholesterol deposition and crystallization 
on inflammatory responses in cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC3623938
PMID: 23412688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2013 Oct;106:72-8. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Annexin A5 inhibits atherogenic and pro-inflammatory effects of
lysophosphatidylcholine.

Domeij H(1), Hua X, Su J, Bäcklund A, Yan Z, Frostegård AG, Haeggström JZ, Modéer
T, Frostegård J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Medicine, Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Institute of Environmental Medicine, Unit of
Immunology and Chronic Disease, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory condition, and rupture of
atherosclerotic plaques is a major cause of cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) is generated in low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
during oxidation and/or enzymatic modification and has been implicated in
atherosclerosis. Annexin A5 (ANXA5) is an antithrombotic and atheroprotective
plasma protein. Here, we demonstrate novel pro-inflammatory and atherogenic
properties of LPC, and inhibitory effects of ANXA5.
METHODS: Endothelial cells and macrophages (differentiated from, THP-1 a
monocytic cell line) were co-cultured. Expression of MMP-9 and OxLDL uptake by
macrophages were studied by flow cytometry. The effect of LPC on leukotriene B4
(LTB4) synthesis in macrophages was studied by enzyme immunoassay (EIA).
Chemotactic properties of LPC were investigated using a mouse intra-peritoneal
recruitment model.
RESULTS: Co-culture of macrophages and endothelial cells enhanced MMP-9
expression in both cell types. This effect was increased by LPC and diminished by
ANXA5. Likewise, LPC induced LTB4 production by macrophages, whereas native LDL
or phosphatidylcholine (PTC) had no effect. ANXA5 inhibited uptake of OxLDL in
macrophages. LPC induced cell infiltration in vivo, as determined by increased
cell count in mouse peritoneal exudates, and this effect was inhibited by ANXA5.
CONCLUSIONS: ANXA5 could potentially play an important protective role in both
atherogenesis and atherosclerotic plaque rupture by reducing pro-inflammatory
effects of OxLDL and LPC as well as inhibiting OxLDL binding and uptake by
macrophages. The possibility that ANXA5 could be developed into a novel therapy
against CVD deserves further study.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23391726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013 Apr;10(4):219-30. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2013.8. Epub 2013
Feb 5.

The biology behind the atherothrombotic effects of cigarette smoke.

Csordas A(1), Bernhard D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital Zürich, Raemistrasse
100, CH-8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

Cigarette smoke is an aerosol that contains >4,000 chemicals, including nicotine,
carbon monoxide, acrolein, and oxidant compounds. Exposure to cigarette smoke
induces multiple pathological effects in the endothelium, several of which are
the result of oxidative stress initiated by reactive oxygen species, reactive
nitrogen species, and other oxidant constituents of cigarette smoke.
Cigarette-smoke exposure interferes adversely with the control of all stages of
plaque formation and development and pathological thrombus formation. The
reactive oxygen species in cigarette smoke contribute to oxidative stress,
upregulation of inflammatory cytokines, and endothelial dysfunction, by reducing 
the bioavailability of nitric oxide. Plaque formation and the development of
vulnerable plaques also result from exposure to cigarette smoke via the
enhancement of inflammatory processes and the activation of matrix
metalloproteases. Moreover, exposure to cigarette smoke results in platelet
activation, stimulation of the coagulation cascade, and impairment of
anticoagulative fibrinolysis. Many cigarette-smoke-mediated prothrombotic changes
are quickly reversible upon smoking cessation. Public health efforts should
urgently promote our understanding of current cigarette-smoke-induced
cardiovascular pathology to encourage individuals to reduce their exposure to
cigarette smoke and, therefore, the detrimental consequences of associated
atherothrombotic disease.

PMID: 23380975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Mar;45(3):194-202. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gms121. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Inhibitory effect of apolipoprotein A-I on matrix metalloproteinase-2 expression 
in vivo and in vitro.

Wang W(1), Shi X, Yuan Y, Zhu H, Zhou W, Huang H, Feng M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China.

In the present study, we investigated the effects of apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) 
on matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression in vivo and in vitro. First, we 
detected the effects of apoA-I on aorta MMP-2, peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor α/γ (PPAR α/γ), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and nuclear factor kappa B
(NF-κB) expressions in atherosclerotic rabbit models using immunohistochemical
methods. The results showed that the expressions of MMP-2, COX-2, and NF-κB were 
decreased in aortas of atherosclerotic rabbits treated with apoA-I, while PPAR
α/γ expression was increased. Then, we chose the important inflammation cells,
macrophages to testify those effects in vitro. Macrophages were divided into six 
groups and treated with different concentrations of apoA-I, the mRNA expressions 
of MMP-2, PPAR α/γ, and COX-2 were then determined using reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction, and protein expression of PPAR γ, NF-κB were detected 
by western blot analysis. The levels of MMP-2 and PPAR α in cultured supernatants
were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Interestingly, the in
vitro results were similar to the results of the in vivo study. After incubation 
with apoA-I for 24 h, the expressions of MMP-2, COX-2, and NF-κB were decreased, 
while PPAR α/γ expression was increased. In consideration of their particular
roles in the process of making plaque stable in vivo and in vitro, we speculate
that the inhibitory effect of apoA-I on MMP-2 expression may have a close
relationship with the effects of apoA-I on PPAR α/γ, COX-2, and NF-κB
expressions. Although further research is needed to clarify the underlying
mechanisms of these effects, our findings provide a novel insight into the
anti-atherosclerotic plaque rupture effects of apoA-I.

PMID: 23299078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2012 Dec;10(12):1533-43. doi: 10.1586/erc.12.157.

The complex puzzle underlying the pathophysiology of acute coronary syndromes:
from molecular basis to clinical manifestations.

Cimmino G(1), Conte S, Morello A, D'Elia S, Marchese V, Golino P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-Thoracic and Respiratory Sciences, Section of Cardiology,
Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) still represent a major cause of death in Western 
countries; in the vast majority of cases, coronary atherosclerosis represents the
common pathological lesion to all forms of ACS. It is currently believed that
plaque complication (rupture, fissuration, and so on), with the consequent
superimposed thrombosis, is a key factor ultimately leading to the clinical
occurrence of ACS. Over the last two decades, our understanding of the basic
mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of ACS has progressed significantly
and the crucial role of inflammation in this phenomenon is now widely recognized.
The sequence of events is represented by plaque complication (i.e., rupture,
fissuration or erosion), exposure of tissue factor and other prothrombotic
substances, such as von Willebrand factor and collagen, to the blood flow,
activation of platelets and of the coagulation cascade and thrombus formation
within the coronary artery. However, not all complicated plaques cause the
clinical occurrence of ACS and similar complicated plaques may cause different
clinical manifestations. A complex interaction between different factors, such as
arterial vessel wall substrates, degree of inflammation of the culprit lesion,
local rheological characteristics of blood flow, as well as factors present in
the circulating blood, will determine the severity (complete vs incomplete
occlusion) and the persistence of coronary blood flow cessation, which, in turn, 
will be largely responsible for the clinical picture. Targeting tissue factor,
the key player in the activation of the coagulation cascade, may represent an
important therapeutic strategy to prevent the clinical manifestation of ACS.

PMID: 23253277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013 Apr;33(4):490-8. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.198. Epub
2012 Dec 19.

Treatment with Evasin-3 reduces atherosclerotic vulnerability for ischemic
stroke, but not brain injury in mice.

Copin JC(1), da Silva RF, Fraga-Silva RA, Capettini L, Quintao S, Lenglet S,
Pelli G, Galan K, Burger F, Braunersreuther V, Schaller K, Deruaz M, Proudfoot
AE, Dallegri F, Stergiopulos N, Santos RA, Gasche Y, Mach F, Montecucco F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Neutrophilic inflammation might have a pathophysiological role in both carotid
plaque rupture and ischemic stroke injury. Here, we investigated the potential
benefits of the CXC chemokine-binding protein Evasin-3, which potently inhibits
chemokine bioactivity and related neutrophilic inflammation in two mouse models
of carotid atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke, respectively. In the first model,
the chronic treatment with Evasin-3 as compared with Vehicle (phosphate-buffered 
saline (PBS)) was investigated in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice implanted of a 
'cast' carotid device. In the second model, acute Evasin-3 treatment (5 minutes
after cerebral ischemia onset) was assessed in mice subjected to transient left
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Although CXCL1 and CXCL2 were upregulated in
both atherosclerotic plaques and infarcted brain, only CXCL1 was detectable in
serum. In carotid atherosclerosis, treatment with Evasin-3 was associated with
reduction in intraplaque neutrophil and matrix metalloproteinase-9 content and
weak increase in collagen as compared with Vehicle. In ischemic stroke, treatment
with Evasin-3 was associated with reduction in ischemic brain neutrophil
infiltration and protective oxidants. No other effects in clinical and
histological outcomes were observed. We concluded that Evasin-3 treatment was
associated with reduction in neutrophilic inflammation in both mouse models.
However, Evasin-3 administration after cerebral ischemia onset failed to improve 
poststroke outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3618389
PMID: 23250107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Eur Heart J. 2013 Mar;34(10):719-28. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs411. Epub 2012 Dec
13.

Update on acute coronary syndromes: the pathologists' view.

Falk E(1), Nakano M, Bentzon JF, Finn AV, Virmani R.

Author information: 
(1)Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark.

Although mortality rates from coronary heart disease in the western countries
have declined in the last few decades, morbidity caused by this disease is
increasing and a substantial number of patients still suffer acute coronary
syndrome (ACS) and sudden cardiac death. Acute coronary syndrome occurs as a
result of myocardial ischaemia and its manifestations include acute myocardial
infarction and unstable angina. Culprit plaque morphology in these patients
varies from thrombosis with or without coronary occlusion to sudden narrowing of 
the lumen from intraplaque haemorrhage. The coronary artery plaque morphologies
primarily responsible for thrombosis are plaque rupture, and plaque erosion, with
plaque rupture being the most common cause of acute myocardial infarction,
especially in men. Autopsy data demonstrate that women <50 years of age more
frequently have erosion, whereas in older women, the frequency of rupture
increases with each decade. Ruptured plaques are associated with positive
(expansive) remodelling and characterized by a large necrotic core and a thin
fibrous cap that is disrupted and infiltrated by foamy macrophages. Plaque
erosion lesions are often negatively remodelled with the plaque itself being rich
in smooth muscle cells and proteoglycans with minimal to absence of inflammation.
Plaque haemorrhage may expand the plaque rapidly, leading to the development of
unstable angina. Plaque haemorrhage may occur from plaque rupture (fissure) or
from neovascularization (angiogenesis). Atherosclerosis is now recognized as an
inflammatory disease with macrophages and T-lymphocytes playing a dominant role. 
Recently at least two subtypes of macrophages have been identified. M1 is a
pro-inflammatory macrophage while M2 seems to play a role in dampening
inflammation and promoting tissue repair. A third type of macrophage, termed by
us as haemoglobin associated macrophage or M(Hb) which is observed at site of
haemorrhage also can be demonstrated in human atherosclerosis. In order to
further our understanding of the specific biological events which trigger plaque 
instability and as well as to monitor the effects of novel anti-atherosclerotic
therapies newer imaging modalities in vivo are needed.

PMID: 23242196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2012 Oct-Dec;26(4):775-82.

Pathophysiological mechanisms linking depression and atherosclerosis: an
overview.

Pizzi C, Santarella L, Costa MG, Manfrini O, Flacco ME, Capasso L, Chiarini S, Di
Baldassarre A, Manzoli L.

It is well recognized that depression is independently associated with
cardiovascular events. However, uncertainties remain on the pathophysiological
pathways underlying the association between depression and coronary heart
disease. In addition to the traditional cardiovascular risk factors, autonomic
nervous system (ANS), low grade of inflammation, platelet and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function and genetic factors may adversely
impact the endothelium of the arterial wall. We provide an overview of the
pathophysiological mechanisms and indices which seem to have a role in promoting 
and accelerating atherosclerosis and its complications due to plaque rupture and 
thrombosis. Given that the relationship between depression and atherosclerosis
cannot be fully explained by single mechanisms, which seem at least partially
interrelated, the depression-related dysfunctions in the ANS and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis seem to play a major role, promoting chronic 
inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and platelet activation and aggregation,
which in turn are key steps in the development of atherosclerosis and its
complications.

PMID: 23241128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Br J Radiol. 2013 Jan;86(1021):20120318. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20120318.

An initial evaluation of analyser-based phase-contrast X-ray imaging of carotid
plaque microstructure.

Appel AA(1), Chou CY, Larson JC, Zhong Z, Schoen FJ, Johnston CM, Brey EM,
Anastasio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Carotid artery plaque instability can result in rupture and lead to ischaemic
stroke. Stability of plaques appears to be a function of composition. Current
non-invasive imaging techniques are limited in their ability to classify distinct
histological regions within plaques. Phase-contrast (PC) X-ray imaging methods
are an emerging class of techniques that have shown promise for identifying
soft-tissue features without use of exogenous contrast agents. This is the first 
study to apply analyser-based X-ray PC imaging in CT mode to provide
three-dimensional (3D) images of excised atherosclerotic plaques. The results
provide proof of principle for this technique as a promising method for analysis 
of carotid plaque microstructure. Multiple image radiography CT (MIR-CT), a
tomographic implementation of X-ray PC imaging that employs crystal optics, was
employed to image excised carotid plaques. MIR-CT imaging yields three
complementary images of the plaque's 3D X-ray absorption, refraction and scatter 
properties. These images were compared with histological sections of the tissue. 
X-ray PC images were able to identify the interface between the plaque and the
medial wall. In addition, lipid-rich and highly vascularized regions were visible
in the images as well as features depicting inflammation. This preliminary
research shows MIR-CT imaging can reveal details about plaque structure not
provided by traditional absorption-based X-ray imaging and appears to identify
specific histological regions within plaques. This is the first study to apply
analyser-based X-ray PC imaging to human carotid artery plaques to identify
distinct soft-tissue regions.

PMCID: PMC3615397
PMID: 23239697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 26;109(52):21444-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217972110. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Painting blood vessels and atherosclerotic plaques with an adhesive drug depot.

Kastrup CJ(1), Nahrendorf M, Figueiredo JL, Lee H, Kambhampati S, Lee T, Cho SW, 
Gorbatov R, Iwamoto Y, Dang TT, Dutta P, Yeon JH, Cheng H, Pritchard CD, Vegas
AJ, Siegel CD, MacDougall S, Okonkwo M, Thai A, Stone JR, Coury AJ, Weissleder R,
Langer R, Anderson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences
and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Apr 12;112(8):1094-6.

The treatment of diseased vasculature remains challenging, in part because of the
difficulty in implanting drug-eluting devices without subjecting vessels to
damaging mechanical forces. Implanting materials using adhesive forces could
overcome this challenge, but materials have previously not been shown to durably 
adhere to intact endothelium under blood flow. Marine mussels secrete strong
underwater adhesives that have been mimicked in synthetic systems. Here we
develop a drug-eluting bioadhesive gel that can be locally and durably glued onto
the inside surface of blood vessels. In a mouse model of atherosclerosis,
inflamed plaques treated with steroid-eluting adhesive gels had reduced
macrophage content and developed protective fibrous caps covering the plaque
core. Treatment also lowered plasma cytokine levels and biomarkers of
inflammation in the plaque. The drug-eluting devices developed here provide a
general strategy for implanting therapeutics in the vasculature using adhesive
forces and could potentially be used to stabilize rupture-prone plaques.

PMCID: PMC3535589
PMID: 23236189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Med Pregl. 2012 Sep-Oct;65(9-10):388-95.

[Inflammatory process in atherogenesis: new facts about old flame].

[Article in Serbian]

Vucević D(1), Radak D, Radosavljević T, Mladenović D, Milovanović I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut za patologku fiziologiju, Medicinski fakultet, Beograd.
danijela.vucevic@mfub.bg.ac.rs

INTRODUCTION. Atherosclerosis is a progressive, multifactorial, diffuse,
multisystemic, chronic, inflammatory disease, which is manifested by disorders of
vascular, immune and metabolic system. Pathogenesis of this disease is not fully 
understood. Endothelial Dysfunction and Inflammatory Process. Endothelial
dysfunction is recognized as the crucial step in atherogenesis. A lot of studies 
have confirmed the involvement of various mediators of inflammation in initial
proatherogenic processes, such as the upregulation of adhesion molecules on
endothelial cells, binding of low density lipoproteins to endothelium, activation
of macrophages and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells. Fatty stain and
Inflammatory Process. Fatty stain consists of foam cell accumulation. After foam 
cell formation, mediators of inflammation initiate a series ofintracellular
events that include the induction of inflammatory cytokines. Thus, a vicious
circle of inflammation, modification of lipoproteins and further inflammation can
be maintained in the artery. Transitory Lesion and Inflammatory Process. In
transitory lesion intensive phagocytosis of oxidized low density lipoproteins
additionally activates monocytes and macrophages and consequently facilitates and
exacerbates the inflammatory response. Fibrotic Plaque and Inflammatory Process. 
Inflammatory process, matrix-degrading metalloproteinases activity, platelets
aggregation and smooth muscle cells proliferation play a central role in
development of fibrotic plaque. Complex Lesion and Inflammatory Process. It has
been shown that inflammation is closely related to the development of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture.CONCLUSION: The contribution of inflammatory
process has become increasingly meaningful in understanding the initiation,
progression and clinical manifestations ofatherosclerosis.

PMID: 23214332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;32(9):1287-9.

[Current research situation of atherosclerotic vulnerable plaque and discussion
of the efficacy of simiao yongan decoction].

[Article in Chinese]

Ding Y(1), Peng L, Lu SC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin
300193.

The vulnerable plaque is the basis for atherosclerosis (AS) plaque rupture and
thrombosis, thus further leading to the occurrence of acute cardiovascular events
(ACEs). By analyzing the current research situation of atherosclerotic vulnerable
plaque, identifying that inflammation and thrombosis are key links in plaque
vulnerability, and the roles of white blood cell and platelet aggregation,
endothelial cell adhesion and their common connection mechanisms: PS/PSGL-1 in
inflammation and the formation of thrombosis. From the viewpoints of inhibiting
cell adhesion, fighting against inflammation reaction and thrombosis, the
research ideas of Simiao Yongan Decoction in stabilizing atherosclerotic
vulnerable plaque were explored.

PMID: 23185777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Coron Artery Dis. 2013 Jan;24(1):23-8. doi: 10.1097/MCA.0b013e32835aab4a.

Usefulness of plasma matrix metalloproteinase-9 level in predicting future
coronary revascularization in patients after acute myocardial infarction.

Wang KF(1), Huang PH, Chiang CH, Hsu CY, Leu HB, Chen JW, Lin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to determine whether plasma levels of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and inflammatory markers can predict the long-term
prognosis of coronary revascularization in patients after acute myocardial
infarction (AMI).
BACKGROUND: MMPs have been implicated in the development of atherosclerosis and
plaque rupture in acute coronary syndrome.
METHODS: Ninety-six consecutive patients (63±11 years) diagnosed with myocardial 
infarction were enrolled. All patients were followed up for 43±12 months. Plasma 
levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 were determined from blood samples collected
immediately after hospitalization. Coronary revascularization was defined as
having received a percutaneous coronary intervention or a coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery.
RESULTS: A total of 29 patients (30%) had undergone coronary revascularization
during the follow-up period, including 27 percutaneous coronary intervention and 
two coronary artery bypass graft surgery. The baseline characteristics were
similar between groups with or without revascularization. Patients with coronary 
revascularization had significantly higher MMP-9 levels (P=0.048), but not MMP-2 
levels. In addition, a positive correlation was found between circulating MMP-9
level and total cholesterol (r=0.250, P=0.016) and low-density
lipoprotein-cholesterol (r=0.284, P=0.009). All patients were divided into a
high-MMP-9 group (highest tertile≥1.10 ng/ml) and a low-MMP-9 group (<1.10
ng/ml). The incidence of coronary revascularization was significantly increased
in the high-MMP-9 group (P=0.034). In a multivariate Cox regression analysis that
included MMP-9 and classical risk factors, the MMP-9 level was an independent
predictor of coronary revascularization in patients after AMI (hazard ratio,
2.72; 95% confidence interval, 1.24-5.98; P=0.026).
CONCLUSION: Increased plasma levels of MMP-9 but not MMP-2 or inflammatory
markers predict future coronary revascularization, and a significant association 
was observed with MMP-9 and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol. These findings
suggest a pivotal role of MMP-9 in atherothrombosis in AMI patients.

PMID: 23151854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am Heart J. 2012 Nov;164(5):786-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.08.018. Epub 2012 Oct
17.

Soluble form of membrane attack complex independently predicts mortality and
cardiovascular events in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction treated
with primary percutaneous coronary intervention.

Lindberg S(1), Pedersen SH, Mogelvang R, Galatius S, Flyvbjerg A, Jensen JS,
Bjerre M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Gentofte University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
soerenli@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The complement system is an important mediator of inflammation, which
plays a pivotal role in atherosclerosis and acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
Animal studies suggest that activation of the complement cascade resulting in the
formation of soluble membrane attack complex (sMAC), contributes to both
atherosclerosis and plaque rupture and may be the direct cause of tissue damage
related to ischemia/reperfusion injury. However clinical data of sMAC during an
AMI is sparse. Accordingly the aim was to investigate the prognostic role of sMAC
in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
METHODS: We included 725 STEMI-patients admitted to a single, high-volume
invasive heart centre, treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI), from September 2006 to December 2008. Blood samples were drawn immediately
before PCI. Plasma sMAC was measured using an in-house immunoassay. Endpoints
were all-cause mortality (n = 62) and the combined endpoint (n = 122) of major
cardiovascular events (MACE) defined as cardiovascular mortality and admission
due recurrent AMI or heart failure. Follow-up time was 12 months.
RESULTS: During 12 months of follow-up 62 patients died from all causes and 122
patients reached the combined end-point of MACE. Patients with high sMAC (>75th
percentile) had increased risk of both all-cause mortality and MACE. Even after
adjustment for confounding risk factors by Cox-regression analyses, high levels
of sMAC remained an independent predictor of all-cause mortality (hazard ratio
1.81 [95% CI 1.06-3.06; P = .029]) and MACE (hazard ratio 1.70 [95% CI 1.16-2.48;
P = .006]).
CONCLUSIONS: High plasma sMAC independently predicts all-cause mortality and MACE
in STEMI-patients treated with PCI.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23137511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2013 Feb;61(2):166-74. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e318279b78a.

Platelet function in ischemic heart disease.

Picker SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
susanne.picker@uk-koeln.de

Blood platelets (PLTs) play a key role in atherothrombosis due to their ability
of thrombus formation after rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque. Numerous
clinical trials have established the efficacy of PLT function blockade in the
prevention of acute coronary syndromes. Meanwhile, nearly all patients undergoing
cardiopulmonary bypass grafting present with anti-PLT therapy. PLTs interact also
with endothelial cells, leukocytes, and smooth muscle cells and are involved in
vascular inflammation. This may result in an excessive fibroproliferative
response after vessel dilatation. Furthermore, many PLT blockers are associated
with response variability up to nonresponsiveness leading to increased
reintervention and transfusion rates both identified as independent risk factors 
for an adverse clinical outcome after coronary interventions. Summarizing the
role of PLTs for normal hemostasis and the pathophysiology of atherothrombosis,
this review describes the current status of anti-PLT therapy and highlights some 
new anti-PLT drugs in the prevention of serious cardiovascular events.

PMID: 23107874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Dec;225(2):461-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.09.013. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Distribution of macrophage polarization markers in human atherosclerosis.

Stöger JL(1), Gijbels MJ, van der Velden S, Manca M, van der Loos CM, Biessen EA,
Daemen MJ, Lutgens E, de Winther MP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht,
Maastricht University, 6229ER Maastricht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Macrophages are decisive in the chronic inflammatory processes that
drive atherogenesis. The purpose of this study was to explore the presence and
spatial distribution of polarized macrophage populations in human
atherosclerosis.
METHODS & RESULTS: We used transcriptomics and immunohistochemistry to analyze
macrophage subset dynamics in successive stages of atherogenesis. Developing
lesions progressively accumulated both M1 and M2 cells, as was signified by the
enhanced expression of associated markers at the transcriptional and protein
level. Histologically, these markers were confined to overlapping, but spatially 
distinct CD68(+) areas of the intima. We subsequently quantified the presence of 
these markers in relation to morphological determinants of plaque stability. In
line with their pro-inflammatory characteristics, M1 macrophages dominated the
rupture-prone shoulder regions of the plaque over M2 polarized cells, while the
fibrous caps of lesions showed no significant differences between subsets. In
contrast, vascular adventitial tissue displayed a pronounced M2 activation
profile. As expected, areas of intraplaque hemorrhage clearly associated with
CD163 staining. Rather than being limited to complicated lesions, this M2 marker 
was also readily detectable in stable plaques. Finally, foamy macrophages
displayed an ambiguous repertoire that incorporates individual M1 and M2 markers.
CONCLUSION: M1 and M2 macrophage populations are present throughout
atherogenesis. These subsets display disparity when it comes to their prevalence 
in morphological compartments of the vessel wall. Our current findings warrant
continued investigation into the functional implications of polarized macrophage 
populations in human atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23078881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Rev Port Cardiol. 2012 Nov;31(11):733-45. doi: 10.1016/j.repc.2012.02.018. Epub
2012 Oct 6.

[High-sensitivity C-reactive protein as a biomarker of risk in coronary artery
disease].

[Article in Portuguese]

Silva D(1), Pais de Lacerda A.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Cardiologia I, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa
Norte, Lisboa, Portugal. dojreis@hotmail.com

Vascular inflammation plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
and mediates various stages of atherosclerotic plaque development, from lipid
streak formation to the plaque rupture and destabilization that precedes the
clinical syndromes of cardiovascular disease. Inflammatory biomarkers constitute 
valuable tools to study this process, enabling the effects of different
therapeutic interventions to be assessed. Currently, C-reactive protein (CRP)
determined by high-sensitivity methods (hs-CRP) is the most extensively studied
biomarker. Data regarding hs-CRP and cardiovascular risk, though largely
consistent, are of unclear clinical relevance. This article provides a
comprehensive review of current knowledge concerning cardiovascular risk and
hs-CRP, and concludes with an evidence-based analysis of the current role of
hs-CRP in cardiovascular risk assessment.

Copyright © 2011 Sociedade Portuguesa de Cardiologia. Published by Elsevier
España. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23046630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neurology. 2012 Sep 25;79(13 Suppl 1):S58-62.

Role of the vascular endothelium and plaque in acute ischemic stroke.

Madden JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
janeamadden@aol.com

The underlying cause of stroke lies in the damage to the arterial endothelial
cell layer. The most profound damage is due to atherosclerosis, which can either 
occlude an artery or produce a thromboembolism. Diabetes and inflammation
contribute to atherosclerosis and the associated endothelial damage by initiating
and promoting the deposition of modified lipids in the subendothelium and by
inhibiting endothelial nitric oxide (NO) production. At the same time, both
production of endothelin-1 and generation of reactive oxygen species increase. In
addition, leukocytes adhere to the endothelium and levels of C-reactive protein
increase. The stroke that ensues upon cerebral artery occlusion or plaque rupture
continues and exacerbates endothelial damage. Statins have been shown to be
helpful in preventing stroke and diminishing its consequences. An international
clinical trial to determine if an NO donor is effective (Efficacy of Nitric Oxide
in Stroke study) is currently under way. Other interventions such as
antioxidants, ρ kinase inhibition, and endothelial progenitor cells offer
promising avenues of research and perhaps therapeutic avenues for treatment of
stroke. This article discusses the role of the vascular endothelium in ischemic
stroke and those interventions that may provide plausible avenues for future
therapy.

PMID: 23008414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Imaging Biol. 2012 Oct;14(5):523-33. doi: 10.1007/s11307-012-0586-7.

Molecular imaging to identify the vulnerable plaque--from basic research to
clinical practice.

Kusters DH(1), Tegtmeier J, Schurgers LJ, Reutelingsperger CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht
(CARIM), Maastricht University, PO Box 616, 6200, MD, Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is still the leading cause of death in the Western
World. Adverse outcomes of CVD include stroke, myocardial infarction, and heart
failure. Atherosclerosis is considered to be the major cause of CVD and is
estimated to cause half of all deaths in developed countries. Atherosclerotic
lesions of the vessel wall may obstruct blood flow mechanically through stenosis,
but rupture of atherosclerotic plaques causing formation of occlusive thrombi is 
far more prevalent. Unfortunately, conventional diagnostic tools fail to assess
whether a plaque is vulnerable to rupture. Research over the past decade
identified the biological processes that are implicated in the course towards
plaque rupture, like cell death and inflammation. Knowledge about plaque biology 
propelled the development of imaging techniques that target biologic processes in
order to predict the vulnerable plaque. This paper discusses novel and existing
molecular imaging targets and addresses advantages and disadvantages of these
targets and respective imaging techniques in respect of clinical application and 
socio-economic impact.

PMID: 22983911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2012 Oct;23(5):412-21. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328357ca6e.

Role of colony-stimulating factors in atherosclerosis.

Di Gregoli K(1), Johnson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Pathology, School of Clinical Sciences,
University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The varied effects of colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) on
monocytes and macrophages during inflammation and atherosclerosis and its
clinical presentation prompt the question whether the differing effects of CSFs
dictate macrophage function and disease progression.
RECENT FINDINGS: CSFs can give rise to heterogeneous populations of
monocyte-derived macrophages that are characterized by disparate expression of
distinct molecules which dictate their ability to process lipid and regulate
inflammatory and immune responses. The CSFs have been found within
atherosclerotic plaques and in the circulation where their levels may act as
predictive biomarkers of disease progression. Accordingly, differing exposure to 
these factors imparts divergent genomic signatures and functional properties on
macrophages and may impact the multifactorial steps involved in atherogenesis,
plaque progression and instability.
SUMMARY: Great interest in macrophage heterogeneity in the genesis and
progression of atherosclerosis has led to the search for consistent markers of
specific subsets in both animal models and humans. A better understanding of the 
overlap and competition between CSF regulation of macrophage phenotypes is
therefore warranted, to allow their characterization in plaques. Subsequent
targeted genetic and pharmacological intervention will facilitate the generation 
of therapeutic approaches to halt the progression and rupture of advanced
atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 22964991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2012 Dec;60(6):431-42. doi:
10.1007/s00005-012-0192-z. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Pathophysiological mechanisms of carotid plaque vulnerability: impact on ischemic
stroke.

Pelisek J(1), Eckstein HH, Zernecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar der
Technischen Universitaet Muenchen, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.
pelisek@gmx.de

Stroke is among the major causes of mortality and disabilities in the world.
About 80 % of all strokes in the anterior circulation are ischemic and up to 20 %
of all ischemic strokes are caused by extracranial atherosclerotic carotid artery
stenosis. The prevalence of a cervical internal carotid artery stenosis increases
with age and can be found in 6.9 % of the elderly population (>65 years).
Atherosclerotic changes of the carotid vessel wall can lead to plaque
vulnerability and may result in arterio-arterial embolism, which frequently
underlie carotid-related cerebrovascular ischemic events. Carotid atherosclerosis
is characterised by inflammation, extensive degradation of extracellular matrix
components, neovascularization, and as recently recognised is also affected by
epigenetic changes. These factors accelerate the progression of atherosclerosis
towards vulnerable plaques and increase the risk of ischemic stroke. In this
review, the main pathophysiological mechanisms leading to rupture-prone carotid
artery plaques and successive ischemic stroke are considered. It is important to 
recognise the heterogeneity of atherosclerosis and that various
pathophysiological processes dissected in this review are not acting
individually, but rather in a complementary manner. The identification and
careful integration of all relevant factors will be required for the development 
of future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 22945688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Nov;32(11):2569-79. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.251314. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells play a key role in promoting atherosclerosis in
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.

Macritchie N(1), Grassia G, Sabir SR, Maddaluno M, Welsh P, Sattar N, Ialenti A, 
Kurowska-Stolarska M, McInnes IB, Brewer JM, Garside P, Maffia P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place,
Glasgow G12 8TA, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical studies have identified that reduced numbers of circulating
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) act as a predictor of cardiovascular events
in coronary artery disease and that pDCs are detectable in the shoulder region of
human atherosclerotic plaques, where rupture is most likely to occur. Results
from animal models are controversial, with pDCs seen to inhibit or promote lesion
development depending on the experimental settings. Here, we investigated the
role of pDCs in atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrated that the aorta and spleen of both
apolipoprotein E-deficient and C57BL/6 mice displayed similar numbers of pDCs,
with similar activation status. In contrast, assessment of antigen
uptake/presentation using the Eα/Y-Ae system revealed that aortic pDCs in
apolipoprotein E-deficient(-) mice were capable of presenting in vivo
systemically administered antigen. Continuous treatment of apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice with anti-mouse plasmacytoid dendritic cell antigen 1 (mPDCA-1) 
antibody caused specific depletion of pDCs in the aorta and spleen and
significantly reduced atherosclerosis formation in the aortic sinus (by 46%;
P<0.001). Depletion of pDCs also reduced macrophages (by 34%; P<0.05) and
increased collagen content (by 41%; P<0.05) in aortic plaques, implying a more
stable plaque phenotype. Additionally, pDC depletion reduced splenic T-cell
activation and inhibited interleukin-12, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1,
monokine induced by interferon-γ, interferon γ-induced protein 10, and vascular
endothelium growth factor serum levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify a critical role for pDCs in atherosclerosis
and suggest a potential role for pDC targeting in the control of the pathology.

PMID: 22936340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Can J Cardiol. 2012 Nov-Dec;28(6):678-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2012.05.003. Epub
2012 Aug 24.

Clinical value of drugs targeting inflammation for the management of coronary
artery disease.

Duchatelle V(1), Kritikou EA, Tardif JC.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, 5000 Belanger St E,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease are the leading cause of death
worldwide. Atherosclerosis is a complex inflammatory disease that results from
lipid accumulation and oxidation in the arterial wall combined with an active
inflammatory reaction involving transmigration of monocytes and other
inflammatory cells from the blood stream into the vessel wall. Many therapeutic
approaches have been tested to treat atherosclerosis and prevent its
complications, with statins being the most efficient therapy by reducing the
levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and preventing major cardiovascular events.
However, the risk of atherothrombotic complications still remains high, causing
millions of deaths around the world each year. Extensive research has shed light 
on the cascade of cellular and molecular events that lead from atherosclerotic
plaque formation to its rupture and have highlighted promising new therapeutic
targets, each being implicated at different stages of the atherosclerotic plaque 
formation and progression. In this review, we briefly discuss the potential of
high-density lipoprotein-based therapies, given the anti-inflammatory properties 
of high-density lipoprotein. We then present different approaches that tackle
inflammation, including inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase, blockade of P-selectin, use
of a viral-derived serpin, and interleukin-1β inhibition. All these targets have 
shown encouraging results in clinical trials and support the idea that targeting 
inflammation could reduce cardiovascular complications in patients with coronary 
artery disease.

Copyright © 2012 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22926034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Vascular. 2012 Aug;20(4):210-6. doi: 10.1258/vasc.2011.201202. Epub 2012 Aug 15.

Matrix metalloproteinases in vascular physiology and disease.

Siefert SA(1), Sarkar R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, Division of Vascular Surgery,
Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases
that primarily degrade components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Remodeling
of the ECM by MMPs is important in both physiological and pathological processes,
including organ generation/regeneration, angiogenesis, wound healing,
inflammation and tumor growth. In the vasculature, MMPs play a role in beneficial
processes such as angiogenesis, collateral artery formation and thrombus
resolution. However, MMP expression is also implicated in the pathogenesis of
vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, aortic aneurysms, plaque rupture and
neointimal hyperplasia after balloon angioplasty. Here, we review the structure, 
functions and roles of MMPs in both neovascularization and vascular pathology and
discuss the potential of, and challenges that face, adapting MMPs as therapeutic 
targets in vascular disease.

PMID: 22896663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Thromb Haemost. 2012 Sep;108(3):443-56. doi: 10.1160/TH12-05-0341. Epub 2012 Aug 
7.

Do we know enough about the immune pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes to
improve clinical practice?

Matusik P(1), Guzik B, Weber C, Guzik TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medicine Laboratory, Department of Internal and Agricultural
Medicine, Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, Kracow, Poland.

Morbidities related to atherosclerosis, such as acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
including unstable angina and myocardial infarction, remain leading causes of
mortality. Unstable plaques are inflamed and infiltrated with macrophages and T
lymphocytes. Activated dendritic cells interact with T cells, yielding
predominantly Th1 responses involving interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and tumour
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), while the role of interleukin 17 (IL-17) is
questionable. The expansion of CD28nullCD4 or CD8 T cells as well as pattern
recognition receptors activation (especially Toll-like receptors; TLR2 and TLR4) 
is characteristic for unstable plaque. Inflammation modifies platelet and fibrin 
clot characteristics, which are critical for ACS. Understanding of the
inflammatory mechanisms of atherothrombosis, bridging inflammation, oxidative
stress and immune regulation, will allow for the detection of subjects at risk,
through the use of novel biomarkers and imaging techniques including
intravascular ultrasound, molecular targeting, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET).
Moreover, understanding the specific inflammatory pathways of plaque rupture and 
atherothrombosis may allow for immunomodulation of ACS. Statins and anti-platelet
drugs are anti-inflammatory, but importance of immune events in ACS warrants the 
introduction of novel, specific treatments directed either on cytokines, TLRs or 
inflammasomes. While the prime time for the introduction of immunologically
inspired diagnostic tests and treatments for atherosclerosis have not come yet,
we are closer than ever before to finally being able to benefit from this vast
body of experimental and clinical evidence. This paper provides a comprehensive
review of the role of the immune system and inflammation in ACS.

PMID: 22872109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Jul;1262:134-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06600.x.

Cellular and molecular players in the atherosclerotic plaque progression.

Businaro R(1), Tagliani A, Buttari B, Profumo E, Ippoliti F, Di Cristofano C,
Capoano R, Salvati B, Riganò R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza
University of Rome, Latina, Italy. rita.businaro@uniroma1.it

Atherosclerosis initiation and progression is controlled by inflammatory
molecular and cellular mediators. Cells of innate immunity, stimulated by various
endogenous molecules that have undergone a transformation following an oxidative 
stress or nonenzymatic glycation processes, activate cells of the adaptive
immunity, found at the borders of atheromas. In this way, an immune response
against endogenous modified antigens takes place and gives rise to chronic
low-level inflammation leading to the slow development of complex atherosclerotic
plaques. These lesions will occasionally ulcerate, thus ending with fatal
clinical events. Plaque macrophages represent the majority of leukocytes in the
atherosclerotic lesions, and their secretory activity, including proinflammatory 
cytokines and matrix-degrading proteases, may be related to the fragilization of 
the fibrous cap and then to the rupture of the plaque. A considerable amount of
work is currently focused on the identification of locally released
proinflammatory factors that influence the evolution of the plaque to an unstable
phenotype. A better understanding of these molecular processes may contribute to 
new treatment strategies. Mediators released by the immune system and associated 
with the development of carotid atherosclerosis are discussed.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22823445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2012 Oct;23(5):462-70. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328356dba0.

Macrophage oxysterols and their binding proteins: roles in atherosclerosis.

Olkkonen VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research bInstitute of Biomedicine,
Anatomy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. vesa.olkkonen@helsinki.fi

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To offer a comprehensive review on the roles that oxysterols
synthesized or engulfed by macrophages, or oxysterol-binding proteins in these
cells, play in the development and progression of atherosclerotic lesions.
RECENT FINDINGS: Oxysterols abundant within the plaque have the capacity to
potentiate macrophage proinflammatory signaling and to induce cell death. These
activities may contribute to formation of the complex lesion, expansion of the
necrotic core, and to plaque rupture. On the contrary, several endogenous
oxysterols generated by cholesterol hydroxylases act as ligands of liver X
receptors, stimulate macrophage cholesterol efflux, repress proinflammatory
signaling, and promote macrophage survival, counteracting lesion progression.
Cytoplasmic oxysterol-binding proteins represent a family of sterol and
phosphoinositide sensors that may contribute to the regulatory impact of these
bioactive lipids on processes relevant in the context of atherogenesis.
SUMMARY: The generation and deposition of oxysterols within the developing plaque
is envisioned to modulate macrophage lipid metabolism, to affect the delicate
balance of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes, and to impact cell
fate decisions, thus, determining whether the lesion remains benign or whether it
develops into a hazardous, vulnerable plaque.

PMID: 22814702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Jul;56(7):1073-80. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100710.

The role of marine omega-3 (n-3) fatty acids in inflammatory processes,
atherosclerosis and plaque stability.

Calder PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, MP887 Southampton General
Hospital, Southampton, UK. pcc@soton.ac.uk

Atherosclerosis has an important inflammatory component and acute cardiovascular 
events can be initiated by inflammatory processes occurring in advanced plaques. 
Fatty acids influence inflammation through a variety of mechanisms; many of these
are mediated by, or associated with, the fatty acid composition of cell
membranes. Human inflammatory cells are typically rich in the n-6 fatty acid
arachidonic acid, but the contents of arachidonic acid and of the marine n-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can be
altered through oral administration of EPA and DHA. Eicosanoids produced from
arachidonic acid have roles in inflammation. EPA also gives rise to eicosanoids
and these are usually biologically weak. EPA and DHA give rise to resolvins which
are anti-inflammatory and inflammation resolving. EPA and DHA also affect
production of peptide mediators of inflammation (adhesion molecules, cytokines,
etc.). Thus, the fatty acid composition of human inflammatory cells influences
their function; the contents of arachidonic acid, EPA and DHA appear to be
especially important. The anti-inflammatory effects of marine n-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs) may contribute to their protective actions towards
atherosclerosis and plaque rupture.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22760980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Thromb Haemost. 2012 Sep;108(3):457-63. doi: 10.1160/TH12-04-0271. Epub 2012 Jun 
28.

Fractalkine--a local inflammatory marker aggravating platelet activation at the
vulnerable plaque.

Flierl U(1), Schäfer A.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kardiologie und Angiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Hannover, Germany.

Chemokines play an important role in inducing chemotaxis of cells, piloting white
blood cells in immune surveillance and are crucial parts in the development and
progression of atherosclerosis. Platelets are mandatory players in the initiation
of atherosclerotic lesion formation and are susceptible targets for and producers
of chemokines. Several chemokine receptors on platelets have been described
previously, amongst them CX(3)CR1, the receptor for fractalkine. The unique
chemokine fractalkine (CX(3)CR1, FKN) exists as a soluble as well as a
membrane-anchored glycoprotein. Its essential role in the formation of
atherosclerotic lesions and atherosclerosis progression has been impressively
described in mouse models. Moreover, fractalkine induces platelet activation and 
adhesion via a functional fractalkine receptor (CX(3)CR1) expressed on the
platelet surface. Platelet activation via the FKN/CX(3)CR1-axis triggers
leukocyte adhesion to activated endothelium, and fractalkine-induced platelet
P-selectin is mandatory for leukocyte recruitment under arterial flow conditions.
This review summarises the role of fractalkine as a potential local inflammatory 
mediator which influences platelet activation in the setting of atherosclerosis. 
Beyond that, aspects of a potential interaction between fractalkine and platelet 
responsiveness to antiplatelet drugs are described. Furthermore, the possible
impact of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) on atherosclerosis
progression, platelet activation and fractalkine signalling are discussed.

PMID: 22739755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2012 Oct;15(4):790-1. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Septic rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque of the ascending aorta.

Maillet JM(1), Palombi T, Sablayrolles JL, Bonnet N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Centre Cardiologique du
Nord, Saint-Denis, France. jm.maillet@ccncardio.com

Infectious aortitis has become a rare disease thanks to the widespread use of
antibiotics. We report the case of a patient who, 15 days after initiation of
antibiotics for bacteraemia due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), developed acute chest pain followed by haemodynamic instability. A
tamponade due to a rupture into the pericardium of the ascending aorta at the
site of an atherosclerotic plaque was diagnosed by an emergent chest contrasted
computed tomography (CT). Intraoperatively, the septic nature of the rupture was 
suspected. All aortic atherosclerotic plaque samples grew MRSA. Postoperatively, 
the patient had an uneventful recovery after 12 weeks of antibiotic therapy.
Transoesophageal echocardiography and chest CT were normal at 3 months after
cessation of antibiotics. This case report permits the review of some
characteristics of this disease, its physiopathology as well as the therapeutic
implications.

PMCID: PMC3445358
PMID: 22728897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2012 Jun;7(6):899-916. doi: 10.2217/nnm.12.57. Epub 2012 Jun
20.

Emerging engineered magnetic nanoparticulate probes for molecular MRI of
atherosclerosis: how far have we come?

Kanwar RK(1), Chaudhary R, Tsuzuki T, Kanwar JR.

Author information: 
(1)Nanomedicine, Laboratory of Immunology & Molecular Biomedical Research, Center
for Biotechnology & Interdisciplinary Biosciences, Institute for Frontier
Materials, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria 3217, Australia.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic, progressive, immunoinflammatory disease of the
large and medium-sized arteries, and a major cause of cardiovascular diseases.
Atherosclerosis often progresses silently for decades until the occurrence of a
major catastrophic clinical event such as myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest
and stroke. The main challenge in the diagnosis and management of atherosclerosis
is to develop a safe, noninvasive technique that is accurate and reproducible,
which can detect the biologically active high-risk vulnerable plaques (with
ongoing active inflammation, angiogenesis and apoptosis) before the occurrence of
an acute clinical event. This article reviews the events involved in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in light of recently advanced understanding of
the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. Next, we elaborate on the interesting 
developments in molecular MRI, by describing the recently engineered magnetic
nanoparticulate probes targeting clinically promising molecular and cellular
players/processes, involved in early atherosclerotic lesion formation to plaque
rupture and erosion.

PMID: 22715913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038376. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor is enhanced in acute coronary syndromes
and is associated with the inflammatory response.

Müller II(1), Müller KA, Schönleber H, Karathanos A, Schneider M, Jorbenadze R,
Bigalke B, Gawaz M, Geisler T.

Author information: 
(1)Kardiologie und Kreislauferkrankungen, Medizinische Klinik III, Eberhard Karls
Universität, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation promotes atherosclerosis in cardiovascular
disease and is a major prognostic factor for patients undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI). Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is
involved in the progress of atherosclerosis and plaque destabilization and plays 
a pivotal role in the development of acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Little is
known to date about the clinical impact of MIF in patients with symptomatic
coronary artery disease (CAD).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a pilot study, 286 patients with symptomatic CAD (n = 119
ACS, n = 167 stable CAD) undergoing PCI were consecutively evaluated. 25 healthy 
volunteers served as control. Expression of MIF was consecutively measured in
patients at the time of PCI. Baseline levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6), "regulated 
upon activation, normal T-cell expressed, and secreted" (RANTES) and monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) were measured by Bio-Plex Cytokine assay.
C-reactive protein (CRP) was determined by Immunoassay. Patients with ACS showed 
higher plasma levels of MIF compared to patients with stable CAD and control
subjects (median 2.85 ng/mL, interquartile range (IQR) 3.52 versus median 1.22
ng/mL, IQR 2.99, versus median 0.1, IQR 0.09, p<0.001). Increased MIF levels were
associated with CRP and IL-6 levels and correlated with troponin I (TnI) release 
(spearman rank coefficient: 0.31, p<0.001). Patients with ACS due to plaque
rupture showed significantly higher plasma levels of MIF than patients with flow 
limiting stenotic lesions (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge this is the first study, demonstrating enhanced
expression of MIF in ACS. It is associated with established inflammatory markers,
correlates with the extent of cardiac necrosis marker release after PCI and is
significantly increased in ACS patients with "culprit" lesions. Further attempts 
should be undertaken to characterize the role of MIF for risk assessment in the
setting of ACS.

PMCID: PMC3367911
PMID: 22693633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Platelets. 2013;24(4):255-62. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2012.690113. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Role of platelets as mediators that link inflammation and thrombosis in
atherosclerosis.

Fuentes Q E(1), Fuentes Q F, Andrés V, Pello OM, Font de Mora J, Palomo G I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunohematology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile.

Platelets, crucial mediators of the acute complications of atherosclerosis that
cause life-threatening ischemic events at late stages of the disease, are also
key effectors of inflammation throughout plaque development through their
interaction with endothelial and immune cells in the injured vessel wall. During 
the first steps of atherosclerosis, blood inflammatory leukocytes interact with
the damaged endothelium in areas rich in platelet aggregates. In late stages of
the disease, platelets secrete several inflammatory molecules, even without
forming aggregates. These molecules exacerbate the inflammation and induce the
transition from chronic to acute disease, featuring increased instability of the 
atherosclerotic lesion that results in plaque rupture and thrombosis. Moreover,
platelets play an important role in vascular wall remodeling induced by chronic
inflammation by controlling vascular cell differentiation and proliferation. In
this review, we discuss the role of platelets as cell mediators that link
inflammation and thrombosis in atherosclerotic disease and their potential in the
development of new therapeutic tools to fight cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 22671308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Climacteric. 2012 Dec;15(6):602-6. doi: 10.3109/13697137.2012.667174. Epub 2012
May 29.

Increase in MMP-2 activity in overweight and obese women is associated with
menopausal status.

Miksztowicz V(1), Siseles N, Fernandez Machulsky N, Schreier L, Berg G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lipids and Lipoproteins, Department of Clinical Biochemistry,
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, INFIBIOC, University of Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are synthesized in the subendothelium and
are involved in the atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease process because of
their major significance in vascular remodeling and plaque rupture. MMPs are also
synthesized in adipose tissue during angiogenesis; however, the role of these
enzymes in obesity and insulin-resistant states is still controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate MMP-2 activity in the circulation of overweight and obese 
women and in normal-weight controls, and to associate the levels of these factors
with metabolic, adipose tissue and inflammation biomarkers.
METHODS: Plasma MMP-2 activity, adiponectin and C-reactive protein concentration,
lipoprotein profile and HOMA were determined in 39 healthy women (13 normal
weight and 26 overweight/obese).
RESULTS: Overweight/obese women were older (p < 0.001) than normal-weight women; 
20/26 of overweight/obese women were postmenopausal compared with 4/13 of
normal-weight women. Overweight/obese women had significantly higher plasma
activity of MMP-2 than controls (mean relative area: 0.81 (range 0.4-1.92) vs.
1.33 (range 0.4-3.1); p < 0.005); this difference was lost after adjusting for
menopausal status. MMP-2 activity positively correlated with waist circumference 
(p < 0.002), HOMA (p < 0.003), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (p <
0.05), apolipoprotein B (p = 0.006) and triglyceride/high density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol index (p < 0.001), and negatively with HDL cholesterol (p <
0.001), HDL2 cholesterol (p < 0.008), HDL3 cholesterol (p < 0.05) and adiponectin
(p < 0.05). The association with HOMA and adiponectin persisted even after
adjusting for menopausal status.
CONCLUSION: Our finding of increased plasma activity of MMP-2 in overweight/obese
women, associated with menopausal status, is important given that it fits in with
an early stage of cardiovascular disease; the association of MMP-2 activity with 
obesity markers may be a link between adipose tissue and risk for cardiovascular 
disease.

PMID: 22642972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2012 May;7(5):735-49. doi: 10.2217/nnm.12.46.

Emerging engineered magnetic nanoparticulate probes for targeted MRI of
atherosclerotic plaque macrophages.

Kanwar RK(1), Chaudhary R, Tsuzuki T, Kanwar JR.

Author information: 
(1)Nanomedicine-Laboratory of Immunology & Molecular Biomedical Research, Centre 
for Biotechnology & Interdisciplinary Biosciences & Institute for Frontier
Materials, Australia. jagat.kanwar@deakin.edu.au

Inflammation is known to present at all stages of atherosclerotic lesion/plaque
development, which often progresses silently for decades, before the occurrence
of acute clinical events. Rupture of mature complex plaques with ongoing
inflammation can lead to thrombosis, and many adverse acute clinical events such 
as stroke, myocardial infarction and/or sudden coronary death. Among
new-generation noninvasive imaging modalities, molecular MRI with target-specific
novel nanoparticulate contrast agents has shown great promise for the
visualization of atherosclerosis at the molecular and cellular level in both
animals and humans. Considering the key role macrophages play in atherosclerotic 
inflammation from lesion initiation to plaque rupture, this article reviews the
recently engineered magnetic nanoparticulate probes targeting macrophages, their 
phagocytic activities, surface receptors and molecular products such as
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin. The usefulness of some of these
probes as multimodal and drug monitoring agents is also reviewed along with the
challenges and future perspectives of the present developments for clinical
benefit.

PMID: 22630154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biofactors. 2012 Sep-Oct;38(5):320-8. doi: 10.1002/biof.1024. Epub 2012 May 24.

Inflammatory markers in coronary artery disease.

Ikonomidis I(1), Michalakeas CA, Parissis J, Paraskevaidis I, Ntai K, Papadakis
I, Anastasiou-Nana M, Lekakis J.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Cardiology Department, University of Athens, Attikon Hospital, Athens,
Greece. ignoik@otenet.gr

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the most common manifestations of
atherosclerosis. Inflammation is considered one of the major processes that
contribute to atherogenesis. Inflammation plays an important role not only on the
initiation and progression of atherosclerosis but also on plaque rupture, an
event that leads to acute vascular events. Various biomarkers express different
pathways and pathophysiologic mechanisms of cardiovascular disease, and
inflammatory biomarkers express different parts of the atherogenic process,
regarding the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis or the
destabilization of the atherosclerotic plaque. Therefore, inflammatory biomarkers
may prove to be useful in the detection, staging, and prognosis of patients with 
CAD. Furthermore, the fact that inflammatory processes are essential steps in the
course of the disease offers future therapeutic targets for the interruption of
the atherogenic process or for the management of acute events.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 22628054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jul;32(7):1696-706. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.251181. Epub 2012 May 17.

Toll-like receptor 4 activation in microvascular endothelial cells triggers a
robust inflammatory response and cross talk with mononuclear cells via
interleukin-6.

Lu Z(1), Li Y, Jin J, Zhang X, Lopes-Virella MF, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: It is known that toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) plays an important role
in atherosclerosis. Because both microvascular (MIC) and macrovascular (MAC)
endothelial cells (ECs) are present in atherosclerotic lesions, the present study
compared TLR4-triggered inflammatory response and cross talk with mononuclear
cells between MIC and MAC ECs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ELISA, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and gene
expression profiling showed that TLR4 activation by lipopolysaccharide stimulated
a much higher expression of inflammatory genes including cytokines, chemokines,
growth factors, and adhesion molecules in MIC ECs than MAC ECs. Furthermore,
coculture studies showed that TLR4 activation in MIC ECs, but not MAC ECs,
induced a cross talk with U937 mononuclear cells through MIC EC-released
interleukin-6 to upregulate matrix metalloproteinase-1 expression in U937 cells. 
To explore molecular mechanisms underlying the different responses to TLR4
activation between MIC and MAC ECs, we showed that MIC ECs had a higher
expression of TLR4 and CD14 and a higher TLR4-mediated nuclear factor-kappaB
activity than MAC ECs.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study showed that TLR4 activation triggers a more robust
inflammatory response in MIC ECs than MAC ECs. Given the importance of
inflammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases in plaque rupture, MIC ECs
may play a key role in plaque destabilization through a TLR4-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3384534
PMID: 22596222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Jun;222(2):519-23. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.03.016. Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Regulatory T cells and IL-10 levels are reduced in patients with vulnerable
coronary plaques.

George J(1), Schwartzenberg S, Medvedovsky D, Jonas M, Charach G, Afek A, Shamiss
A.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Affiliated to the Hebrew
University and Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel. jacobg@post.tau.ac.il

BACKGROUND: Despite having a similar large extent of atherosclerotic coronary
affliction, some patients suffer of recurrent cardiac events, whereas others
remain asymptomatic.
HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesized the existence of a systemic "signature" that could
distinguish "vulnerable" patients with preexisting coronary atherosclerosis from 
those having similar risk factors and atheromatous burden, but no history of
clinically evident plaque rupture/erosion.
METHODS: Twenty three patients who had at least two prior myocardial infarctions 
("vulnerable group") were matched in respect to their background and coronary
atherosclerosis extent with twenty one patients without a history of previous
myocardial infarction who underwent routine coronary angiography before valvular 
surgery. We studied a panel of cytokines, antibodies and hormones including IL-6,
IL-10, IL-12, antibodies to β2 glycoprotein I (β2GPI), antibodies to
oxidized-LDL, adiponectin and resistin, along with levels of circulating EPCs and
Tregs.
RESULTS: A significantly higher level of Treg cells was present in the control
(73.4%±4) than in the "vulnerable patient" group (62.2%±10.7), p<0.001. IL-10
level was also significantly higher in the control than in the vulnerable
patients (2.6±1.2 pg/ml versus 0.9±0.1 pg/ml respectively, p=0.03). There was no 
significant difference in the circulating levels of the other cytokines, hormones
or EPCs between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Regulatory T cells and serum IL-10 may discriminate "vulnerable"
versus stable patients and may have a protective role against plaque rupture in
patients with coronary atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2012 Apr;37(4):413-8. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2012.04.017.

[Developments in the study of CD40/ CD40L gene and its polymorphism in
atherosclerosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu T(1), Guo R, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Third Xiangya Hospital; College of Pharmacy, Central
South University, Changsha 410013, China.

CD40/CD40L is a pair of complementary transmembrane glycoproteins, expressed on
immune cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, platelets and other cells
involved in regulation of immunity, inflammation, coagulation and other
pathophysiologic states. A large number of researches have demonstrated that,
when atherosclerosis occurs, CD40L ligates CD40; subsequently CD40 is activated
and stimulates downstream signaling pathways, including nuclear factor-kappaB,
with consequent up-regulation of proinflammatory and proatherogenic genes. Thus
it plays an important role in the occurrence, development and plaque-rupture of
atherosclerosis. CD40/CD40L is a bridge between immunity, inflammation, and a
hypercoagulable state, and may be an important target for prevention and
treatment of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 22561578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Apr;1254:7-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06497.x.

Plaque neovascularization: defense mechanisms, betrayal, or a war in progress.

Moreno PR(1), Purushothaman M, Purushothaman KR.

Author information: 
(1)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, and the Marie-Josee and
Henry R. Kravis Cardiovascular Health Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029, USA. pedro.moreno@mountsinai.org

Angiogenesis is induced from sprouting of preexisting endothelial cells leading
to neovascularization. Imbalance in the angiogenic and antiangiogenic mediators
triggers angiogenesis, which may be physiological in the normal state or
pathological in malignancy and atherosclerosis. Physiologic angiogenesis is
instrumental for restoration of vessel wall normoxia and resolution inflammation,
leading to atherosclerosis regression. However, pathological angiogenesis
enhances disease progression, increasing macrophage infiltration and vessel wall 
thickness, perpetuating hypoxia and necrosis. In addition, thin-walled fragile
neovessels may rupture, leading to intraplaque hemorrhage. Lipid-rich red blood
cell membranes and free hemoglobin are detrimental to plaque composition,
increasing inflammation, lipid core expansion, and oxidative stress. In addition,
associated risk factors that include polymorphysms in the haptoglobin genotype
and diabetes mellitus may modulate the features of plaque vulnerability. This
review will focus on physiological and pathological angiogenesis in
atherosclerosis and summarizes the current status of anti-vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) therapy, microvascular rarefaction, and possible
statin-mediated effects in atherosclerosis neovascularization.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22548565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Apr 24;59(17):1539-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.12.037.

Coronary arterial 18F-sodium fluoride uptake: a novel marker of plaque biology.

Dweck MR(1), Chow MW, Joshi NV, Williams MC, Jones C, Fletcher AM, Richardson H, 
White A, McKillop G, van Beek EJ, Boon NA, Rudd JH, Newby DE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
MDweck@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Oct 23;60(17):1711-2; author reply p.1712-3.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Apr 24;59(17):1549-50.

OBJECTIVES: With combined positron emission tomography and computed tomography
(CT), we investigated coronary arterial uptake of 18F-sodium fluoride (18F-NaF)
and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) as markers of active plaque calcification
and inflammation, respectively.
BACKGROUND: The noninvasive assessment of coronary artery plaque biology would be
a major advance particularly in the identification of vulnerable plaques, which
are associated with specific pathological characteristics, including
micro-calcification and inflammation.
METHODS: We prospectively recruited 119 volunteers (72 ± 8 years of age, 68% men)
with and without aortic valve disease and measured their coronary calcium score
and 18F-NaF and 18F-FDG uptake. Patients with a calcium score of 0 were used as
control subjects and compared with those with calcific atherosclerosis (calcium
score >0).
RESULTS: Inter-observer repeatability of coronary 18F-NaF uptake measurements
(maximum tissue/background ratio) was excellent (intra-class coefficient 0.99).
Activity was higher in patients with coronary atherosclerosis (n = 106) versus
control subjects (1.64 ± 0.49 vs. 1.23 ± 0.24; p = 0.003) and correlated with the
calcium score (r = 0.652, p < 0.001), although 40% of those with scores >1,000
displayed normal uptake. Patients with increased coronary 18F-NaF activity (n =
40) had higher rates of prior cardiovascular events (p = 0.016) and angina (p =
0.023) and higher Framingham risk scores (p = 0.011). Quantification of coronary 
18F-FDG uptake was hampered by myocardial activity and was not increased in
patients with atherosclerosis versus control subjects (p = 0.498).
CONCLUSIONS: 18F-NaF is a promising new approach for the assessment of coronary
artery plaque biology. Prospective studies with clinical outcomes are now needed 
to assess whether coronary 18F-NaF uptake represents a novel marker of plaque
vulnerability, recent plaque rupture, and future cardiovascular risk. (An
Observational PET/CT Study Examining the Role of Active Valvular Calcification
and Inflammation in Patients With Aortic Stenosis; NCT01358513).

Copyright © 2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22516444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Jul;4(7):564-76. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201200237. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Plasma fibronectin deficiency impedes atherosclerosis progression and fibrous cap
formation.

Rohwedder I(1), Montanez E, Beckmann K, Bengtsson E, Dunér P, Nilsson J,
Soehnlein O, Fässler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Medicine, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany.

Atherosclerotic lesions are asymmetric focal thickenings of the intima of
arteries that consist of lipids, various cell types and extracellular matrix
(ECM). These lesions lead to vascular occlusion representing the most common
cause of death in the Western world. The main cause of vascular occlusion is
rupture of atheromatous lesions followed by thrombus formation. Fibronectin (FN) 
is one of the earliest ECM proteins deposited at atherosclerosis-prone sites and 
was suggested to promote atherosclerotic lesion formation. Here, we report that
atherosclerosis-prone apolipoprotein E-null mice lacking hepatocyte-derived
plasma FN (pFN) fed with a pro-atherogenic diet display dramatically reduced FN
depositions at atherosclerosis-prone areas, which results in significantly
smaller and fewer atherosclerotic plaques. However, the atherosclerotic lesions
from pFN-deficient mice lacked vascular smooth muscle cells and failed to develop
a fibrous cap. Thus, our results demonstrate that while FN worsens the course of 
atherosclerosis by increasing the atherogenic plaque area, it promotes the
formation of the protective fibrous cap, which in humans prevents plaques rupture
and vascular occlusion.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3407945
PMID: 22514136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(16):2572-87.

Assessment of acute coronary syndromes: focus on novel biomarkers.

Tousoulis D(1), Hatzis G, Papageorgiou N, Androulakis E, Bouras G, Giolis A,
Bakogiannis C, Siasos G, Latsios G, Antoniades C, Stefanadis C.

Author information: 
(1)1st Cardiology Unit, Athens University Medical School, Greece.
drtousoulis@hotmail.com

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of mortality in Western
Societies and several developing countries. Recent evidence suggests that most
detrimental clinical manifestations of CAD, such as acute coronary syndromes
(ACS), are the outcome of inflammatory processes that lead to plaque formation
and rupture and eventually to ischemia and potentially myocardial necrosis.
Neither of the traditionally used biomarkers is thought to be the gold standard
in detection of myocardial ischemia or necrosis. A biomarker that could detect
quite early the ischemic myocardium as well as define the risk of a future event 
with high sensitivity and specificity is still lacking. Several biomarkers,
implicated in the pathogenesis and clinical evolution of atherosclerosis, have
emerged as potent biomarkers for early detection of myocardial ischemia. In the
current review, we summarize recent evidence of the most promising biomarkers and
discuss their potential role in clinical practice in patients suffering from
ACSs.

PMID: 22489714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012 Jun;19(3):609-17. doi: 10.1007/s12350-012-9553-6.

Non-FDG imaging of atherosclerosis: will imaging of MMPs assess plaque
vulnerability?

Hermann S(1), Starsichova A, Waschkau B, Kuhlmann M, Wenning C, Schober O,
Schäfers M.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute for Molecular Imaging-EIMI, Mendelstr. 11, 48149 Münster,
Germany. shermann@uni-muenster.de

Acute ruptures of atherosclerotic plaques with subsequent occlusion account for
the vast majority of clinical events such as myocardial infarction or stroke. New
imaging approaches focusing on the visualization of inflammation in the vessel
wall could emerge as tools for individualized risk assessment and prevention of
events. To this end, PET employing (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) has recently
been introduced for the first clinical trials. Although this approach nicely
visualizes plaques inflammation questions remain with respect to if and how this 
inflammatory signal can be employed for predicting individual plaque rupture.
Molecular imaging of proteases such as matrix-metalloproteinases (MMPs) involved 
in several steps in plaque progression driving plaques into vulnerable,
rupture-prone states seems a promising alternative approach. This review
introduces and discusses the vulnerable plaque concept, animal models with
human-like plaque ruptures and the potential of a FDG versus a non-FDG
MMP-targeted strategy to image rupture-prone plaques.

PMID: 22477642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jun;32(6):1453-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.249516. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Deletion of the angiotensin II type 1a receptor prevents atherosclerotic plaque
rupture in apolipoprotein E-/- mice.

Aono J(1), Suzuki J, Iwai M, Horiuchi M, Nagai T, Nishimura K, Inoue K, Ogimoto
A, Okayama H, Higaki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Medicine and Informatics, Ehime University Graduate
School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 7910295, Japan.

Erratum in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jul;34(7):e18.

OBJECTIVE: Angiotensin II is involved in the genesis of atherosclerosis. As the
role of the angiotensin II type 1a (AT(1a)) receptor in plaque rupture is poorly 
understood, we assessed the hypothesis that the AT(1a)receptor contributes to
atherosclerotic plaque rupture.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture was induced by carotid artery
ligation for 4 weeks followed by polyethylene cuff placement around the carotid
in apolipoprotein E (ApoE)(-/-) and ApoE(-/-) AT(1a)(-/-) mice. The incidence of 
plaque rupture at 4 days after cuff placement was 72% in ApoE(-/-) mice compared 
with 24% in ApoE(-/-) AT(1a)(-/-) mice (P<0.01). Lipid accumulation, macrophage
infiltration, expression of inflammatory cytokines, nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase activity, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity 
in atherosclerotic plaque were markedly attenuated in ApoE(-/-) AT(1a)(-/-)
compared with ApoE(-/-) mice. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein inhibited
macrophage migration in ApoE(-/-) macrophages. In contrast, oxidized low-density 
lipoprotein-induced macrophage trapping was abolished in ApoE(-/-) AT(1a)(-/-)
macrophages, and this was associated with decreased CD36 expression and focal
adhesion kinase activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Conclusion- These results suggest that blocking the AT(1) receptor
may reduce atherosclerotic plaque rupture and that AT(1a) receptor-mediated
macrophage trapping, inflammation, oxidative stress, and matrix metalloproteinase
activation may play crucial roles in plaque vulnerability.

PMID: 22460554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2012 Sep;33(8):1494-501. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3016. Epub
2012 Mar 15.

Intravascular frequency-domain optical coherence tomography assessment of
atherosclerosis and stent-vessel interactions in human carotid arteries.

Jones MR(1), Attizzani GF, Given CA 2nd, Brooks WH, Costa MA, Bezerra HG.

Author information: 
(1)Baptist Heart and Vascular Institute, Central Baptist Hospital, Lexington, KY,
USA. mjones@lexingtoncardio.com

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Carotid artery-related stroke is largely an embolic
disease that has been correlated with inflammation, plaque rupture, and thrombus 
formation in "vulnerable" atherosclerotic plaque. Nevertheless, current
guidelines for carotid revascularization in asymptomatic patients rely on the
calculation of stenosis for risk assessment, a parameter that has been viewed
with increasing skepticism. Intravascular OCT is an imaging technique that offers
high axial resolution (10 μm), allowing an unprecedented micron-level assessment 
of human carotid plaque morphology. This observational article reports the first 
successful use of the newest iteration of this technology, FDOCT without balloon 
occlusion to assess human carotid artery disease and carotid stent-vessel
interaction in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four patients with asymptomatic carotid artery disease and
ambiguous noninvasive and/or angiographic data underwent carotid FDOCT to assess 
risk and to formulate a treatment strategy.
RESULTS: Findings include the unexpected demonstration of TCFAs, plaque rupture, 
thrombus, inflammation, and marked tissue prolapse through stent struts in
patients without high-risk factors by conventional criteria, as well as low-risk 
features in a patient with a high-risk noninvasive study. The procedures were
performed without safety issues or special accommodations for vessel occlusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates the technical feasibility of FDOCT in
cervical carotid arteries. As such, this technology holds the promise of not only
clarifying ambiguous data in individual patients but of providing data that might
call for a future paradigm shift in the assessment of asymptomatic carotid artery
disease.

PMID: 22422179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(28):4358-69.

Inflammation in coronary artery disease and acute myocardial infarction - is the 
stage set for novel therapies?

Klingenberg R(1), Luscher TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research, University Zurich,
Switzerland. roland.klingenberg@usz.ch

Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) constitutes the major cause of death in most
nations and death rates and morbidity remain substantial in the years thereafter.
Inflammation is a hallmark throughout the distinct stages of atherosclerotic
lesion formation preceding AMI as well as at the time of plaque rupture and
during the post-infarct repair phase. Epidemiological, genetic, clinical and
experimental evidence converges on inflammation as a pivotal factor in disease
progression and exacerbation. Harnessing its harmful consequences constitutes an 
attractive therapeutic approach to address this unmet medical need. Components of
the innate and adaptive immune system with the characteristic cytokines
interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-α, respectively exert prominent functions
in atherogenesis and post-infarct remodeling. Leukocyte subsets of the
monocyte/macrophage and CD4(+) T lymphocyte cell lineage interacting with a vast 
array of cells comprising platelets, neutrophils, dendritic cells, mast cells,
vascular smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts orchestrate the inflammatory
pathophysiology underlying plaque progression in the vasculature and fibrotic
repair of the infarct. This pathophysiology is amenable to modification by drugs 
targeting cell proliferation, cell migration, osteogenic/fibrous turnover of the 
extracellular matrix ranging from antimetabolites, glucocorticoids, specific
cytokine and leukotriene antagonists to classic immunosuppressive agents and
vaccines directed specifically at certain disease-relevant antigens. Based on
published data on clinical safety and clinical/experimental efficacy in
inhibiting disease progression this review covers recent advances in this field
and aims to propose candidate drugs for future clinical trials.

PMID: 22390645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2012 Jun;14(3):264-76. doi: 10.1007/s11883-012-0237-0.

Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and risk of atherosclerosis.

Hulsmans M(1), Van Dooren E, Holvoet P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Atherosclerosis and
Metabolism Unit, Belgium.

High levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are observed in chronic human
diseases such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, atherosclerosis, and cardiovascular
diseases. In addition to the presence of oxidative stress, these diseases are
also characterized by deregulated inflammatory responses. Our first aim is to
discuss distinct molecular pathways that determine the rate of mitochondrial ROS 
(mtROS) production and identify agents and enzymes that disrupt the balance
between ROS generation and ROS elimination. Recent studies exploring the
mechanisms linking ROS and inflammation found that ROS derived from mitochondria 
act as signal-transducing molecules that provoke endothelial dysfunction
associated with uncoupling of nitric oxide synthase, induce the infiltration and 
activation of inflammatory cells, and increase apoptosis of endothelial and
vascular smooth muscle cells. Therefore, our second aim is to give a
comprehensive overview of the role of mtROS in all these processes contributing
to atherosclerotic lesion progression and causing plaque erosion and rupture. Our
third aim is to emphasize the role of the inflammatory toll-like receptor 2/NF-κB
signaling pathway in the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mtROS
production in relation to insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and
atherosclerosis. Because mtROS play an active role in several pathogenic
mechanisms there is need for mitochondria-targeted antioxidants. Preliminary
experiments in cell and animal models of cardiovascular diseases showed that some
mitochondria-targeted antioxidants indeed reduce ROS production. However,
wide-spread use in humans requires the development of specific and sensitive
assays to evaluate mitochondrial oxidative stress and the development of orally
active compounds.

PMID: 22350585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Sep;16(9):1978-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2012.01552.x.

Inflammation in atherosclerosis: a cause or a result of vascular disorders?

Manduteanu I(1), Simionescu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology Nicolae Simionescu, Romanian
Academy, Bucharest, Romania.

Sound data support the concept that in atherosclerosis, inflammation and
dyslipidemia intersect each other and that irrespective of the initiator, both
participate from the early stages to the ultimate fate of the atheromatous
plaque. The two partakers manoeuvre a vicious circle in atheroma formation:
dyslipidaemia triggers an inflammatory process and inflammation elicits
dyslipidaemia. Independent of the initial cause, the atherosclerotic lesions
occur focally, in particular arterial-susceptible sites, by a process that,
although continuous, can be arbitrarily divided into a sequence of consecutive
stages that lead from fatty streak to the fibro-lipid plaque and ultimately to
plaque rupture and thrombosis. In the process, the initial event is a change in
endothelial cells (EC) constitutive properties. Then, the molecular alarm signals
send by dysfunctional EC are decoded by specific blood immune cells (monocytes, T
lymphocytes, neutrophils, mast cells) and by the resident vascular cells, that
respond by initiating a robust inflammatory process, in which the cells and the
factors they secrete hasten the atheroma development. Direct and indirect
crosstalk between the cells housed within the nascent plaque, complemented by the
increase in risk factors of atherosclerosis lead to atheroma development and
outcome. The initial inflammatory response can be regarded as a
defense/protective reaction mechanism, but its further amplification, speeds up
atherosclerosis. In this review, we provide an overview on the role of
inflammation and dyslipidaemia and their intersection in atherogenesis. The data 
may add to the foundation of a novel attitude in the diagnosis and treatment of
atherosclerosis.

© 2012 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2012 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822968
PMID: 22348535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Nov;124(21):3568-75.

Inflammation in coronary artery diseases.

Li JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Dyslipidemia, Cardiovascular Medicine, Fu Wai Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, China.
lijnjn@yahoo.com.cn

The concept that atherosclerosis is an inflammation has been increasingly
recognized, and subsequently resulted in great interest in revealing the
inflammatory nature of the atherosclerotic process. More recently, a large body
of evidence has supported the idea that inflammatory mechanisms play a pivotal
role throughout all phases of atherogenesis, from endothelial dysfunction and the
formation of fatty streaks to plaque destabilization and the acute coronary
events due to vulnerable plaque rupture. Indeed, although triggers and pathways
of inflammation are probably multiple and vary in different clinical entities of 
atherosclerotic disorders, an imbalance between anti-inflammatory mechanisms and 
pro-inflammatory factors will result in an atherosclerotic progression. Vascular 
endothelial dysfunction and lipoprotein retention into the arterial intima have
been reported as the earliest events in atherogenesis with which inflammation is 
linked. Inflammatory has also been extended to the disorders of coronary
microvasculature, and associated with special subsets of coronary artery disease 
such as silent myocardial ischemia, myocardial ischemia-reperfusion, cardiac
syndrome X, variant angina, coronary artery ectasia, coronary calcification and
in-stent restenosis. Inflammatory biomarkers, originally studied to better
understand the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis, have generated increasing
interest among researches and clinicians. The identification of inflammatory
biomarkers and cellular/molecular pathways in atherosclerotic disease represent
important goals in cardiovascular disease research, in particular with respect of
the development of therapeutic strategies to prevent or reverse atherosclerotic
diseases.

PMID: 22340179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Curr Cardiovasc Imaging Rep. 2012 Feb;5(1):60-68. Epub 2011 Nov 5.

Molecular MRI of Inflammation in Atherosclerosis.

Te Boekhorst BC, van Tilborg GA, Strijkers GJ, Nicolay K.

Inflammatory activity in atherosclerotic plaque is a risk factor for plaque
rupture and atherothrombosis and may direct interventional therapy. Inflammatory 
activity can be evaluated at the (sub)cellular level using in vivo molecular MRI.
This paper reviews recent progress in contrast-enhanced molecular MRI to
visualize atherosclerotic plaque inflammation. Various MRI contrast agents, among
others ultra-small particles of iron oxide, low-molecular-weight Gd-chelates,
micelles, liposomes, and perfluorocarbon emulsions, have been used for in vivo
visualization of various inflammation-related targets, such as macrophages,
oxidized LDL, endothelial cell expression, plaque neovasculature, MMPs,
apoptosis, and activated platelets/thrombus. An enzyme-activatable magnetic
resonance contrast agent has been developed to study myeloperoxidase activity in 
inflamed plaques. Agents creating contrast based on the chemical exchange
saturation transfer mechanism were used for thrombus imaging. Transfer of these
molecular MRI techniques to the clinic will critically depend on the safety
profiles of these newly developed magnetic resonance contrast agents.

PMCID: PMC3261392
PMID: 22308200  [PubMed]


192. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012 Mar;13(3):205-18. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jer319.
Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Non-invasive imaging of atherosclerosis.

Joshi FR(1), Lindsay AC, Obaid DR, Falk E, Rudd JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s
Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK. frj23@cam.ac.uk

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease that causes most myocardial
infarctions, strokes, and acute coronary syndromes. Despite the identification of
multiple risk factors and widespread use of drug therapies, it still remains a
global health concern with associated costs. It is well known that the risks of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture are not well correlated with stenosis severity.
Lumenography has a central place for defining the site and severity of vascular
stenosis as a prelude to intervention for relief of symptoms due to blood flow
limitation. Atherosclerosis develops within the arterial wall; this is not imaged
by lumenography and hence it provides no information regarding underlying
processes that may lead to plaque rupture. For this, we must rely on other
imaging modalities such as ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance
imaging, and nuclear imaging methods. These are capable of reporting on the
underlying pathology, in particular the presence of inflammation, calcification, 
neovascularization, and intraplaque haemorrhage. Additionally, non-invasive
imaging can now be used to track the effect of anti-atherosclerosis therapy. Each
modality alone has positives and negatives and this review will highlight these, 
as well as speculating on future developments in this area.

PMID: 22277118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Thromb Haemost. 2012 Mar;107(3):409-16. doi: 10.1160/TH11-10-0717. Epub 2012 Jan 
25.

Molecular imaging of matrix metalloproteinases in atherosclerotic plaques.

Lenglet S(1), Thomas A, Chaurand P, Galan K, Mach F, Montecucco F.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Foundation for Medical Research, Department of Medical
Specialties, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Ischaemic stroke and myocardial infarction often result from the sudden rupture
of an atherosclerotic plaque. The subsequent arterial thrombosis occluding the
vessel lumen has been widely indicated as the crucial acute event causing
peripheral tissue ischaemia. A complex cross-talk between systemic and
intraplaque inflammatory mediators has been shown to regulate maturation,
remodeling and final rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes (released by several cell
subsets within atherosclerotic plaques), which favour atherogenesis and increase 
plaque vulnerability. Thus, the assessment of intraplaque levels and activity of 
MMP might be of pivotal relevance in the evaluation of the risk of rupture. New
imaging approaches, focused on the visualisation of inflammation in the vessel
wall and plaque, may emerge as tools for individualised risk assessment and
prevention of events. In this review, we summarize experimental findings of the
currently available invasive and noninvasive imaging techniques, used to detect
the presence and activity of MMPs in atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 22274652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Lasers Surg Med. 2012 Jan;44(1):49-59. doi: 10.1002/lsm.21153. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Combined two-photon luminescence microscopy and OCT for macrophage detection in
the hypercholesterolemic rabbit aorta using plasmonic gold nanorose.

Wang T(1), Mancuso JJ, Kazmi SM, Dwelle J, Sapozhnikova V, Willsey B, Ma LL, Qiu 
J, Li X, Dunn AK, Johnston KP, Feldman MD, Milner TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, 1
University Station C0800, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The macrophage is an important early cellular marker
related to risk of future rupture of atherosclerotic plaques. Two-channel
two-photon luminescence (TPL) microscopy combined with optical coherence
tomography (OCT) was used to detect, and further characterize the distribution of
aorta-based macrophages using plasmonic gold nanorose as an imaging contrast
agent.
STUDY DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: Nanorose uptake by macrophages was identified
by TPL microscopy in macrophage cell culture. Ex vivo aorta segments
(8 × 8 × 2 mm(3) ) rich in macrophages from a rabbit model of aorta inflammation 
were imaged by TPL microscopy in combination with OCT. Aorta histological
sections (5 µm in thickness) were also imaged by TPL microscopy.
RESULTS: Merged two-channel TPL images showed the lateral and depth distribution 
of nanorose-loaded macrophages (confirmed by RAM-11 stain) and other aorta
components (e.g., elastin fiber and lipid droplet), suggesting that
nanorose-loaded macrophages are diffusively distributed and mostly detected
superficially within 20 µm from the luminal surface of the aorta. Moreover, OCT
images depicted detailed surface structure of the diseased aorta.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that TPL microscopy combined with OCT can
simultaneously reveal macrophage distribution with respect to aorta surface
structure, which has the potential to detect vulnerable plaques and monitor
plaque-based macrophages overtime during cardiovascular interventions.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3696498
PMID: 22246984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Scientifica (Cairo). 2012;2012:402783. doi: 10.6064/2012/402783. Epub 2012 Dec
16.

Complement activation: an emerging player in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular
disease.

Carter AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Leeds Institute of Genetics, Health and
Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine and Health and the Multidisciplinary
Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Leeds, Clarendon Way, Leeds LS2
9JT, UK.

A wealth of evidence indicates a fundamental role for inflammation in the
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease (CVD), contributing to the development and
progression of atherosclerotic lesion formation, plaque rupture, and thrombosis. 
An increasing body of evidence supports a functional role for complement
activation in the pathogenesis of CVD through pleiotropic effects on endothelial 
and haematopoietic cell function and haemostasis. Prospective and case control
studies have reported strong relationships between several complement components 
and cardiovascular outcomes, and in vitro studies and animal models support a
functional effect. Complement activation, in particular, generation of C5a and
C5b-9, influences many processes involved in the development and progression of
atherosclerosis, including promotion of endothelial cell activation, leukocyte
infiltration into the extracellular matrix, stimulation of cytokine release from 
vascular smooth muscle cells, and promotion of plaque rupture. Complement
activation also influences thrombosis, involving components of the
mannose-binding lectin pathway, and C5b-9 in particular, through activation of
platelets, promotion of fibrin formation, and impairment of fibrinolysis. The
participation of the complement system in inflammation and thrombosis is
consistent with the physiological role of the complement system as a rapid
effector system conferring protection following vessel injury. However, in the
context of CVD, these same processes contribute to development of
atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, and thrombosis.

PMCID: PMC3820556
PMID: 24278688  [PubMed]


196. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2011 Dec;58(4):303-17. doi:
10.1556/AMicr.58.2011.4.7.

Human cytomegalovirus induces MMP-1 and MMP-3 expression in aortic smooth muscle 
cells.

Prochnau D(1), Lehmann M, Straube E, Figulla HR, Rödel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Cardiology , Friedrich-Schiller-University of 
Jena, Germany. dirk.prochnau@med.uni-jena.de

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection may be involved in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis by modulating functions of smooth muscle cells (SMC). In this
study, we performed an oligonucleotide microarray screening of 780
inflammation-associated genes in HCMV-infected aortic SMC (AoSMC). The expression
of 31 genes was stimulated and 24 genes were down-regulated following infection
with HCMV strain DC-134. Following infection with HCMV strain AD-169 infection,
we found 24 genes to be stimulated and 32 genes to be down-regulated. Among these
were primarily genes encoding for CC and CXC chemokines, adhesion molecules, and 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily members, apoptosis-related
factors, signal transduction molecules and transcription regulators. The
up-regulated genes included matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and MMP-3 in HCMV
infected cells. Using RT-PCR and enzyme immunoassay we found stimulated
expression of MMP-1 (3.2-fold expression) and MMP-3 (334-fold expression) in HCMV
strain DC-134-infected AoSMC at 72 h following infection.The findings of our
study suggest that HCMV infection of AoSMC cause an activation of
atherosclerosis-relevant factors in SMC. The increased expression of MMPs which
have been shown to be involved in atherosclerotic plaque rupture and myocardial
infarction is in agreement with the hypothesis that this pathogen might
contribute to plaque inflammation in atherosclerotic disease.

PMID: 22207289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jan;122(1):70-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI43713. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Genetic inactivation of IL-1 signaling enhances atherosclerotic plaque
instability and reduces outward vessel remodeling in advanced atherosclerosis in 
mice.

Alexander MR(1), Moehle CW, Johnson JL, Yang Z, Lee JK, Jackson CL, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Feb 1;122(2):783.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jan;122(1):27-30.

Clinical complications of atherosclerosis arise primarily as a result of luminal 
obstruction due to atherosclerotic plaque growth, with inadequate outward vessel 
remodeling and plaque destabilization leading to rupture. IL-1 is a
proinflammatory cytokine that promotes atherogenesis in animal models, but its
role in plaque destabilization and outward vessel remodeling is unclear. The
studies presented herein show that advanced atherosclerotic plaques in mice
lacking both IL-1 receptor type I and apolipoprotein E (Il1r1⁻/⁻Apoe⁻/⁻ mice)
unexpectedly exhibited multiple features of plaque instability as compared with
those of Il1r1⁺/⁺Apoe⁻/⁻ mice. These features included reduced plaque SMC content
and coverage, reduced plaque collagen content, and increased intraplaque
hemorrhage. In addition, the brachiocephalic arteries of Il1r1⁻/⁻Apoe⁻/⁻ mice
exhibited no difference in plaque size, but reduced vessel area and lumen size
relative to controls, demonstrating a reduction in outward vessel remodeling.
Interestingly, expression of MMP3 was dramatically reduced within the plaque and 
vessel wall of Il1r1⁻/⁻Apoe⁻/⁻ mice, and Mmp3⁻/⁻Apoe⁻/⁻ mice showed defective
outward vessel remodeling compared with controls. In addition, MMP3 was required 
for IL-1-induced SMC invasion of Matrigel in vitro. Taken together, these results
show that IL-1 signaling plays a surprising dual protective role in advanced
atherosclerosis by promoting outward vessel remodeling and enhancing features of 
plaque stability, at least in part through MMP3-dependent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3248279
PMID: 22201681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Harefuah. 2011 Feb;150(2):136-40, 205.

[Lipoprotein associated phospholipase A2].

[Article in Hebrew]

Rubinstein A(1), Izkhakov E.

Author information: 
(1)Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center. ardon@tasmc.health.gov.il

The reduction of elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) and mainly 
dense LDL, is the main target in reducing CHR closely associated with coronary
heart disease (CHD). The findings of epidemiological and clinical investigations 
have, however, revealed that it poses a cardiovascular risk in only half of CHD
patients and that a more effective marker is required. Lipoprotein associated
phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) is an inflammatory biomarker which provides
information on plaque inflammation and stability. It hydrolyzes oxidized
phospholipids, resulting in lysophosphatidylcholine, which is pro-inflammatory in
a theoretic plaque. It is an enzyme that is expressed in macrophages and foam
cells in rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaque. In plasma, 80% of it is attached
to LDL and 20% to HDL. Twenty five epidemiological studies have established that 
Lp-PLA2 is a unique biomarker that is highly vascular-specific and that it is
directly related to plaque instability and rupture. The results of a
meta-analysis of 20,000 patients established a high relative risk for
cardiovascular events in patients with high Lp-PLA2 Levels. Data from
epidemiological studies have shown that Lp-PLA2 is a risk factor for primary and 
secondary ischemic stroke. Studies on drapalib, which is a direct inhibitor of
Lp-PLA2, have shown that Lp-PLA2 prevents necrotic core progression and reduces
plaque inflammation. Patients who are at moderate or high risk of CHD, and who
have high levels of Lp-PLA2, should be considered as high and very high risk,
respectively, and receive the appropriate treatment.

PMID: 22164942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Dec;31(12):2787-91. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.224899.

Autophagy in atherosclerosis: a potential drug target for plaque stabilization.

Schrijvers DM(1), De Meyer GR, Martinet W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 
Antwerp, Belgium. dorien.schrijvers@ua.ac.be

Evidence is accumulating that autophagy occurs in advanced atherosclerotic
plaques. Although there is an almost relentless discovery of molecules that are
involved in autophagy, studies of selective autophagy induction or inhibition
using knockout mice are just now beginning to reveal its biological significance.
Most likely, autophagy safeguards plaque cells against cellular distress, in
particular oxidative injury, by degrading the damaged intracellular material. In 
this way, autophagy is protective and contributes to cellular recovery in an
unfavorable environment. Pharmacological approaches have recently been developed 
to stabilize vulnerable, rupture-prone lesions through induction of autophagy.
This approach has proven to be successful in short-term studies. However, how
autophagy induction affects processes such as inflammation remains to be
elucidated and is currently under investigation. This review highlights the
possibilities for exploiting autophagy as a drug target for plaque stabilization.

PMID: 22096098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Thromb Res. 2012 Feb;129(2):116-26. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2011.09.026. Epub
2011 Oct 27.

Platelet dysfunction in vascular pathologies and how can it be treated.

Alexandru N(1), Popov D, Georgescu A.

Author information: 
(1)Petru Poni Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Iasi, Romania.

Cardiovascular diseases are one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality 
in industrialized countries, and although many processes play a role in the
development of vascular disease, thrombosis is the primary event that
precipitates stroke and acute coronary syndromes. The blood platelets are of
significant importance in medicine. These cells are involved in many
physiological processes, particularly haemostasis through their ability to
aggregate and form clots in response to activation. In addition, these dynamic
cells display activities that extend beyond thrombosis, including an important
role in initiating and sustaining vascular inflammation. The expansion of
knowledge from basic and clinical research has highlighted the critical position 
of platelets in several inflammatory diseases such as arthritis and
atherosclerosis. Platelets are emerging as important mediators of inflammation
and provide important signals to mediate phenotype of other blood and vascular
cells. The important role of platelets in arterial thrombosis and the onset of
acute myocardial infarction after atherosclerotic plaque rupture make inhibition 
of platelet aggregation a critical step in preventing thrombotic events
associated with stroke, heart attack, and peripheral arterial thrombosis.
However, the use of platelet inhibitors for thrombosis prevention must seek a
delicate balance between inhibiting platelet activation and an associated
increased bleeding risk. The aim of this review is to up-date the knowledge on
platelets physiology and dysfunction in pathologies, such as diabetes mellitus,
hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension, emphasizing the link between platelets
and the inflammation-related atherosclerosis. The review evaluates the
opportunities offered by the novel platelet inhibitors to efficiently alleviate
the thrombotic events.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22035630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Ther. 2014 Jan-Feb;21(1):56-66. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e31822b5603.

Omacor and omega-3 fatty acids for treatment of coronary artery disease and the
pleiotropic effects.

Kar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Missouri Hospital 
and Clinics-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO.

Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are found in fish oil and they have been
shown to mitigate the risk of cardiovascular disease. Omega-3 fatty acids are
essential fatty acids because they cannot be synthesized de novo and must be
consumed from dietary sources such as marine fish. It reduces fatal and nonfatal 
myocardial infarction, stroke, coronary artery disease, sudden cardiac death, and
all-cause mortality. It also has beneficial effects in mortality reduction after 
a myocardial infarction. Omacor is a highly potent form of Omega-3 fatty acids
that lowers plasma triglycerides. In patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia
who are refractory to statins, it helps augment triglyceride reduction. Omacor
also increases high-density lipoprotein and decreases low-density lipoprotein
levels. It is well tolerated with minimal adverse effects and no known
interactions causing rhabdomyolysis. In high doses, Omacor has pronounced
cardiovascular benefits with improvement of triglycerides and various lipid
parameters. Omega-3 fatty acids have also been shown to have beneficial effects
on arrhythmias, inflammation, and heart failure. It may also decrease platelet
aggregation and induce vasodilation. Omega-3 fatty acids also reduce
atherosclerotic plaque formation and stabilize plaques preventing plaque rupture 
leading to acute coronary syndrome. Moreover, omega-3 fatty acids may have
antioxidant properties that improve endothelial function and may contribute to
its antiatherosclerotic benefits. In this review, we sought to provide the
current literature on the use of omega-3 fatty acids and the potent formulation
Omacor in the treatment of coronary artery disease.

PMID: 21975796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Stroke. 2011 Dec;42(12):3634-6. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.631200. Epub 2011 Sep 
29.

Late-phase contrast-enhanced ultrasound reflects biological features of
instability in human carotid atherosclerosis.

Shalhoub J(1), Monaco C, Owen DR, Gauthier T, Thapar A, Leen EL, Davies AH.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Section of Vascular Surgery, Department of Experimental Medicine,
Imperial College London, and Charing Cross Hospital, London W6 8RF, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Development of translational functional imaging
modalities for atherosclerosis risk stratification is sought for stroke
prediction. Our group has developed late-phase contrast-enhanced ultrasound
(LP-CEUS) to quantify microbubble contrast retention within carotid
atherosclerosis and shown it to separate asymptomatic plaques from those
responsible for recent cerebrovascular events. We hypothesized that microbubbles 
are retained in areas of plaque inflammation, aiming to examine whether LP-CEUS
signal reflects plaque biology.
METHODS: Subjects awaiting carotid endarterectomy (n=31) underwent axial LP-CEUS 
and diseased intimal segments were symmetrically divided in the long axis.
Half-specimens underwent quantitative immunohistochemical analysis for CD68
(macrophages) and CD31 (angiogenesis). Half-specimens were processed for atheroma
cell culture and supernatant collected at 24 hours for multianalyte profiling for
34 analytes.
RESULTS: Percentage area immunopositivity was significantly higher in subjects in
which normalized plaque late-phase intensity was ≥0 versus <0 (CD68 mean 11.8
versus 6.68, P=0.004; CD31 mean 9.45 versus 4.82, P=0.025). Interleukin-6, matrix
metalloproteinase-1, and matrix metalloproteinase-3 were significantly higher by 
multianalyte profiling when LP-CEUS was ≥0.
CONCLUSIONS: LP-CEUS reflects biological features of inflammation and
angiogenesis, key features predisposing to plaque rupture. Further investigation 
of LP-CEUS as a tissue-specific marker of inflammation for risk stratification of
carotid atherosclerosis is warranted.

PMID: 21960570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Radiographics. 2011 Sep-Oct;31(5):1255-69. doi: 10.1148/rg.315115028.

Complementary value of cardiac FDG PET and CT for the characterization of
atherosclerotic disease.

Stolzmann P(1), Subramanian S, Abdelbaky A, Maurovich-Horvat P, Scheffel H,
Tawakol A, Hoffmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. paul.stolzmann@usz.ch

For decades, the identification of significant luminal narrowing has been the
hallmark to characterize the presence and extent of coronary artery disease.
However, it is now known that characterizations of systemic atherosclerosis
burden and inflammation, as well as the local quality of plaque composition and
morphology, allow better characterization of coronary artery disease and thus may
allow improved prediction of adverse cardiovascular events. Plaque characterized 
histologically as a thin-cap fibroatheroma (ie, an atheroma with a thin fibrous
cap, an underlying lipid-rich necrotic core, and inflammatory activity) has been 
recognized as representing vulnerable or high-risk plaque. Positron emission
tomography (PET) and cardiac computed tomography (CT) are noninvasive modalities 
that provide metabolic (PET) and morphologic (CT) information about
atherosclerotic plaque. PET allows the quantification of the uptake of fluorine
18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) within the arterial wall, which provides a measure of
macrophage activity within atheromatous plaque. Coronary CT allows the depiction 
of plaque morphology and composition. Thus, integrated imaging with PET and CT
(PET/CT) permits coregistration of FDG activity with the presence and morphology 
of plaque and may lead to improved characterization of vulnerable plaque or
vulnerable patients, or both. This review details the methods and principles of
cardiac FDG PET and coronary CT and provides an overview of the research, with an
emphasis on the identification and characterization of vulnerable plaque.

PMID: 21918043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Nov;106(5):757-62. doi: 10.1160/TH11-07-0500. Epub 2011 Sep 
8.

Differential role of monocyte subsets in atherosclerosis.

Hristov M(1), Weber C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. mihail.hristov@med.uni-muenchen.de

Endothelial dysfunction and inflammation of the arterial wall continuously drive 
the development of atherosclerosis. Details regarding the sequential involvement 
of different monocyte subsets in the pathology of this disease have recently
emerged. This review concentrates on major monocyte subpopulations in mouse and
men and specifically addresses their phenotype, function and recruitment during
primary atherosclerosis as well as their contribution to angiogenesis and tissue 
regeneration secondary to plaque rupture.

PMID: 21901241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Rinsho Byori. 2011 Jul;59(7):694-701.

[Pentraxin 3].

[Article in Japanese]

Inoue K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, Nerima-ku,
Tokyo 177-8521, Japan. inouelsbm@yahoo.co.jp

Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is a called as 'brand-new protein in traditional family'
because it belongs with pentraxin family included C-reactive protein(CRP) or
serum protein A (SAP), but the clinical papers published explosively in clinical 
situation in this 3 years. Unlike CRP, PTX3 express in atherosclerotic lesion
which involve macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, or smooth muscle cells, 
predominantly. Interestingly pitavastatin suppress PTX3 gene expression mostly in
human endothelial cells among more than 6000 human genes. Therefore, we expect
PTX3 to be a new biomarker for inflammatory vascular disease. Recently we
developed an ELISA system for the detection of human PTX3 in plasma. Using this
system, we demonstrated that PTX3 predicted patients with unstable angina
pectoris(UAP). But it remains unclear why levels of PTX3 are increased in
patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). We collected blood samples directly 
from the site of plaque rupture in 114 subjects with ACS who underwent PCI with
an aspiration catheter. In addition, we performed immunohistochemical analyses on
ACS patients' aspirated-thrombi to identify the cellular populations expressing
PTX3. From these results, we concluded that infiltrating neutrophils in thrombi
represent a diagnostically important source of PTX3 in patients with ACS.

PMID: 21874796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Angiology. 2011 Oct;62(7):535-42. doi: 10.1177/0003319710398010. Epub 2011 Aug
25.

Inflammation as a marker for the prediction of internal carotid artery restenosis
following eversion endarterectomy--evidence from clinical studies.

Tanaskovic S(1), Isenovic ER, Radak D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Dedinje Cardiovascular Institute, Belgrade
University School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia.

The role of inflammation is well established in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis and an increased level of circulating inflammatory markers may
predict the future risk of atherosclerosis progression and plaque rupture.
C-reactive protein (CRP) identification by hypersensitive methods
(high-sensitivity CRP [hsCRP]) has become a clinical and laboratory inflammation 
marker. Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is a well-established procedure for carotid 
stenosis treatment which can reduce stroke rate. Internal carotid artery (ICA)
restenosis reduction may be prevented by the anti-inflammatory effect of statins.
This review considers the recent findings on the presence of hsCRP and C3
complement concentration and inflammatory plaque composition as well as their
effects on ICA restenosis rate, following eversion CEA with emphasis on human
studies.

PMID: 21873348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Inflam. 2011;2011:514623. doi: 10.4061/2011/514623. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in Heart Disease: Do Antioxidants Have a Role
in Treatment and/or Prevention?

Pashkow FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI, USA.

Inflammation triggered by oxidative stress is the cause of much, perhaps even
most, chronic human disease including human aging. The oxidative stress
originates mainly in mitochondria from reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen
species (ROS/RNS) and can be identified in most of the key steps in the
pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and the consequential clinical manifestations 
of cardiovascular disease. In addition to the formation of atherosclerosis, it
involves lipid metabolism, plaque rupture, thrombosis, myocardial injury,
apoptosis, fibrosis and failure. The recognition of the critical importance of
oxidative stress has led to the enthusiastic use of antioxidants in the treatment
and prevention of heart disease, but the results of prospective, randomized
clinical trials have been overall disappointing. Can this contradiction be
explained and what are its implications for the discovery/development of future
antioxidant therapeutics?

PMCID: PMC3157078
PMID: 21860805  [PubMed]


208. J Math Biol. 2012 Aug;65(2):349-74. doi: 10.1007/s00285-011-0461-1. Epub 2011 Aug
21.

Reaction-diffusion model of atherosclerosis development.

El Khatib N(1), Genieys S, Kazmierczak B, Volpert V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mathematics, Université Lyon 1, UMR 5208 CNRS, 69622,
Villeurbanne, France.

Atherosclerosis begins as an inflammation in blood vessel walls (intima). The
inflammatory response of the organism leads to the recruitment of monocytes.
Trapped in the intima, they differentiate into macrophages and foam cells leading
to the production of inflammatory cytokines and further recruitment of white
blood cells. This self-accelerating process, strongly influenced by low-density
lipoproteins (cholesterol), results in a dramatic increase of the width of blood 
vessel walls, formation of an atherosclerotic plaque and, possibly, of its
rupture. We suggest a 2D mathematical model of the initiation and development of 
atherosclerosis which takes into account the concentration of blood cells inside 
the intima and of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. The model represents a
reaction-diffusion system in a strip with nonlinear boundary conditions which
describe the recruitment of monocytes as a function of the concentration of
inflammatory cytokines. We prove the existence of travelling waves described by
this system and confirm our previous results which suggest that atherosclerosis
develops as a reaction-diffusion wave. The theoretical results are confirmed by
the results of numerical simulations.

PMID: 21858687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Circ Res. 2011 Aug 19;109(5):593-606. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.233163.

Microparticles, vascular function, and atherothrombosis.

Rautou PE(1), Vion AC, Amabile N, Chironi G, Simon A, Tedgui A, Boulanger CM.

Author information: 
(1)Paris Centre de recherche Cardiovasculaire à l'HEGP, INSERM U970, 56, rue
Leblanc, 75373 Paris cedex 15, France.

Membrane-shed submicron microparticles (MPs) are released after cell activation
or apoptosis. High levels of MPs circulate in the blood of patients with
atherothrombotic diseases, where they could serve as a useful biomarker of
vascular injury and a potential predictor of cardiovascular mortality and major
adverse cardiovascular events. Atherosclerotic lesions also accumulate large
numbers of MPs of leukocyte, smooth muscle cell, endothelial, and erythrocyte
origin. A large body of evidence supports the role of MPs at different steps of
atherosclerosis development, progression, and complications. Circulating MPs
impair the atheroprotective function of the vascular endothelium, at least
partly, by decreased nitric oxide synthesis. Plaque MPs favor local inflammation 
by augmenting the expression of adhesion molecule, such as intercellular adhesion
molecule -1 at the surface of endothelial cell, and monocyte recruitment within
the lesion. In addition, plaque MPs stimulate angiogenesis, a key event in the
transition from stable to unstable lesions. MPs also may promote local cell
apoptosis, leading to the release and accumulation of new MPs, and thus creating 
a vicious circle. Furthermore, highly thrombogenic plaque MPs could increase
thrombus formation at the time of rupture, together with circulating MPs released
in this context by activated platelets and leukocytes. Finally, MPs also could
participate in repairing the consequences of arterial occlusion and tissue
ischemia by promoting postischemic neovascularization.

PMID: 21852557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Vis Exp. 2011 Aug 4;(54). pii: 2257. doi: 10.3791/2257.

In vivo near infrared fluorescence (NIRF) intravascular molecular imaging of
inflammatory plaque, a multimodal approach to imaging of atherosclerosis.

Calfon MA(1), Rosenthal A, Mallas G, Mauskapf A, Nudelman RN, Ntziachristos V,
Jaffer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center and Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The vascular response to injury is a well-orchestrated inflammatory response
triggered by the accumulation of macrophages within the vessel wall leading to an
accumulation of lipid-laden intra-luminal plaque, smooth muscle cell
proliferation and progressive narrowing of the vessel lumen. The formation of
such vulnerable plaques prone to rupture underlies the majority of cases of acute
myocardial infarction. The complex molecular and cellular inflammatory cascade is
orchestrated by the recruitment of T lymphocytes and macrophages and their
paracrine effects on endothelial and smooth muscle cells.(1) Molecular imaging in
atherosclerosis has evolved into an important clinical and research tool that
allows in vivo visualization of inflammation and other biological processes.
Several recent examples demonstrate the ability to detect high-risk plaques in
patients, and assess the effects of pharmacotherapeutics in atherosclerosis.(4)
While a number of molecular imaging approaches (in particular MRI and PET) can
image biological aspects of large vessels such as the carotid arteries, scant
options exist for imaging of coronary arteries.(2) The advent of high-resolution 
optical imaging strategies, in particular near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF),
coupled with activatable fluorescent probes, have enhanced sensitivity and led to
the development of new intravascular strategies to improve biological imaging of 
human coronary atherosclerosis. Near infrared fluorescence (NIRF) molecular
imaging utilizes excitation light with a defined band width (650-900 nm) as a
source of photons that, when delivered to an optical contrast agent or
fluorescent probe, emits fluorescence in the NIR window that can be detected
using an appropriate emission filter and a high sensitivity charge-coupled
camera. As opposed to visible light, NIR light penetrates deeply into tissue, is 
markedly less attenuated by endogenous photon absorbers such as hemoglobin, lipid
and water, and enables high target-to-background ratios due to reduced
autofluorescence in the NIR window. Imaging within the NIR 'window' can
substantially improve the potential for in vivo imaging.(2,5) Inflammatory
cysteine proteases have been well studied using activatable NIRF probes(10), and 
play important roles in atherogenesis. Via degradation of the extracellular
matrix, cysteine proteases contribute importantly to the progression and
complications of atherosclerosis(8). In particular, the cysteine protease,
cathepsin B, is highly expressed and colocalizes with macrophages in experimental
murine, rabbit, and human atheromata.(3,6,7) In addition, cathepsin B activity in
plaques can be sensed in vivo utilizing a previously described 1-D intravascular 
near-infrared fluorescence technology(6), in conjunction with an injectable
nanosensor agent that consists of a poly-lysine polymer backbone derivatized with
multiple NIR fluorochromes (VM110/Prosense750, ex/em 750/780nm, VisEn Medical,
Woburn, MA) that results in strong intramolecular quenching at baseline.(10)
Following targeted enzymatic cleavage by cysteine proteases such as cathepsin B
(known to colocalize with plaque macrophages), the fluorochromes separate,
resulting in substantial amplification of the NIRF signal. Intravascular
detection of NIR fluorescence signal by the utilized novel 2D intravascular NIRF 
catheter now enables high-resolution, geometrically accurate in vivo detection of
cathepsin B activity in inflamed plaque. In vivo molecular imaging of
atherosclerosis using catheter-based 2D NIRF imaging, as opposed to a prior 1-D
spectroscopic approach,(6) is a novel and promising tool that utilizes augmented 
protease activity in macrophage-rich plaque to detect vascular
inflammation.(11,12) The following research protocol describes the use of an
intravascular 2-dimensional NIRF catheter to image and characterize plaque
structure utilizing key aspects of plaque biology. It is a translatable platform 
that when integrated with existing clinical imaging technologies including
angiography and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), offers a unique and novel
integrated multimodal molecular imaging technique that distinguishes inflammatory
atheromata, and allows detection of intravascular NIRF signals in human-sized
coronary arteries.

PMCID: PMC3211114
PMID: 21847078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2011 Oct;22(5):358-64. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e32834ab106.

The effect of statins on high-risk atherosclerotic plaque associated with low
endothelial shear stress.

Takahashi S(1), Papafaklis MI, Sakamoto S, Antoniadis AP, Coskun AU, Feldman CL, 
Stone PH.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Low endothelial shear stress (ESS) plays an important role in 
the progression and severity of atherosclerotic lesions. As
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) appear to
stabilize plaque, it would be valuable to understand how statins affect the
nature of lesions in the proatherogenic and proinflammatory environment of low
ESS and the effect of statins on that atherosclerotic process. The purpose of
this review is to summarize the relationship among low ESS, high-risk plaque and 
statins.
RECENT FINDINGS: Low ESS is a critically important determinant of plaque
development and progression to high-risk plaques with large necrotic lipid core, 
intensive inflammation and thin fibrous cap. In addition to the proatherogenic
phenotypic switching in areas of low ESS, local LDL cholesterol concentrations
are also increased in areas of low ESS, which exacerbates the local atherogenic
process. In experimental models, statins appear to reduce the inflammation in
lesions associated with low ESS and reduce the atherosclerotic phenotype even in 
these high-risk prone vascular areas.
SUMMARY: The relationship between low ESS and statins has not been fully
investigated, but the available data underscore the vasculoprotective effect of
statins. Understanding the mechanisms whereby statins reduce the atherogenic and 
inflammatory phenotype resulting from a low ESS environment would provide new
insights to design strategies to prevent regional formation of high-risk,
inflamed plaques likely to rupture and cause an adverse clinical event.

PMID: 21841484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;668 Suppl 1:S50-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.05.085.
Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Fatty acids and inflammation: the cutting edge between food and pharma.

Calder PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Institute of Developmental Sciences Building, MP887 Southampton General Hospital,
Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, United Kingdom. pcc@soton.ac.uk

Inflammation underlies many common conditions and diseases. Fatty acids can
influence inflammation through a variety of mechanisms, including acting via cell
surface and intracellular receptors/sensors that control inflammatory cell
signalling and gene expression patterns. Some effects of fatty acids on
inflammatory cells appear to be mediated by, or at least are associated with,
changes in fatty acid composition of cell membranes. Changes in these
compositions can modify membrane fluidity, lipid raft formation, cell signalling 
leading to altered gene expression, and the pattern of lipid and peptide mediator
production. Cells involved in the inflammatory response are typically rich in the
n-6 fatty acid arachidonic acid, but the contents of arachidonic acid and of the 
n-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can be
altered through oral administration of EPA and DHA. Eicosanoids produced from
arachidonic acid have roles in inflammation. EPA also gives rise to eicosanoids
and these may have differing properties from those of arachidonic acid-derived
eicosanoids. EPA and DHA give rise to resolvins which are anti-inflammatory and
inflammation resolving. Thus, fatty acid exposure and the fatty acid composition 
of human inflammatory cells influences their function. As a result of their
anti-inflammatory actions marine n-3 fatty acids have therapeutic efficacy in
rheumatoid arthritis, although benefits in other inflammatory diseases and
conditions have not been unequivocally demonstrated. The anti-inflammatory
effects of marine n-3 fatty acids may contribute to their protective actions
towards atherosclerosis, plaque rupture and cardiovascular mortality. The
therapeutic dose of n-3 fatty acids is not clear.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21816146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Oct;218(2):356-62. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.06.056. Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Asymptomatic carotid plaque rupture with unexpected thrombosis over a
non-canonical vulnerable lesion.

Mauriello A(1), Servadei F, Sangiorgi G, Anemona L, Giacobbi E, Liotti D,
Spagnoli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomic Pathology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.
alessandro.mauriello@uniroma2.it

OBJECTIVE: Several studies have demonstrated that carotid plaque rupture and
thrombosis represent the most important factors correlated with the onset of
acute cerebrovascular symptoms. Nevertheless, ruptured thrombotic plaques have
been described also in asymptomatic patients. What still needs to be clarified is
why a plaque rupture leads either to an acute ischemic syndrome or, in a minor
group of patients, remains asymptomatic. The purpose of this study was to
systematically compare the histologic features of thrombotic plaques both in
asymptomatic and symptomatic patients in order to identify specific findings that
could explain the peculiar clinical behavior that characterizes each of the
clinical settings.
METHODS: A total of 157 thrombotic plaques from 60 asymptomatic patients and 97
with major stroke who consecutively underwent CEA were serially sectioned and
studied by histology.
RESULTS: A minute cap disruption very frequently characterizes thrombotic plaques
of asymptomatic patients and it was always smaller than large ulcers observed in 
thrombotic symptomatic plaques (651 ± 687μm vs. 4150 ± 3526, p=0.001). In
asymptomatics this typical feature was associated with fewer inflammatory cells
(20.1 ± 8.8 vs. 33.9 ± 26.1 cells × hpf, p=0.001), smaller lipidic-necrotic core 
(33.9%± 2.9% vs. 42.0% ± 2.4%; p=0.04) and larger calcification (16.2 ± 12.8% vs.
8.1 ± 12.2%, p=0.02). Symptomatic patients with thrombotic plaques showed higher 
incidence of metabolic syndrome (p=0.002) and moderate-high Framingham risk
scores (p=0.001) comparing to asymptomatic individuals.
CONCLUSION: The transformation from a stable to a vulnerable plaque is a gradual 
process in the natural history of the disease and plaque rupture is an event not 
necessarily occurring at a late phase but also at earlier one. In this case, the 
rupture will be most likely smaller and clinically asymptomatic.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21813127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Sep;77(3):453-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.06.008. Epub 2011 
Jul 5.

TRPV1: a useful therapeutic target for patients with vulnerable coronary plaques.

Li YB(1), Huang CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
PR China. chenglinhu66@qq.com

Acute coronary syndromes are generally caused by atherosclerotic plaque rupture. 
Inflammation is one of the most important features of vulnerable plaque.
Adventitial vanilloid receptor TRPV1 and sensory C-fibers may play a pistol role 
for adventitial inflammation. TRPV1 is also present in platelets, and the
presence of this receptor may provide a link between inflammatory mediators and
platelet activation in atherosclerosis. The hypothesis we propose here is that
TRPV1 may be a useful therapeutic target for patients with vulnerable coronary
plaques. The fact that statins act directly on sensory neurons to decrease
expression of proinflammatory neuropeptides, supports our hypothesis as above.
However, the mechanisms mediating this potential effect are poorly understood.
Future studies are required to determine whether downregulated expression of
TRPV1 contributes to these therapeutic actions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21733634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Sep 18;412(19-20):1731-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.06.013.
Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Metalloproteinases in metabolic syndrome.

Berg G(1), Miksztowicz V, Schreier L.

Author information: 
(1)Lipids and Lipoproteins Laboratory. Department of Clinical Biochemistry,
INFIBIOC, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires,
Argentina. gaberg@ffyb.uba.ar

Experimental and clinical evidence supports the concept that metalloproteinases
(MMPs), beyond different physiologic functions, also play a role in the
development and rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque. Interest in MMPs has been 
rapidly increasing during the last years, especially as they have been proposed
as biomarkers of vulnerable plaques. Different components of the metabolic
syndrome (MS) have been identified as possible stimulus for the synthesis and
activity of MMPs, like pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant state, hyperglycemia,
hypertension and dyslipidemia. On the other hand, anti-inflammatory cytokines
like adiponectin are inversely associated with MMPs. Among the several MMPs
studied, collagenases (MMP-1 and MMP-8) and gelatinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) are the
most associated with MS. Our aim was to summarize and discuss the relation
between different components of the MS on MMPs, as well as the effect of the
cluster of the metabolic alterations itself. It also highlights the necessity of 
further studies, in both animals and humans, to elucidate the function of novel
MMPs identified, as well as the role of the known enzymes in different steps of
metabolic diseases. Understanding the mechanisms of MS impact on MMPs and vice
versa is an interesting area of research that will positively enhance our
understanding of the complexity of MS and atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Circ Res. 2011 Aug 5;109(4):382-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.243444. Epub 2011
Jun 23.

Ets2 determines the inflammatory state of endothelial cells in advanced
atherosclerotic lesions.

Cheng C(1), Tempel D, Den Dekker WK, Haasdijk R, Chrifi I, Bos FL, Wagtmans K,
van de Kamp EH, Blonden L, Biessen EA, Moll F, Pasterkamp G, Serruys PW,
Schulte-Merker S, Duckers HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Experimental Cardiology, Thoraxcenter,
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

RATIONALE: Neovascularization is required for embryonic development and plays a
central role in diseases in adults. In atherosclerosis, the role of
neovascularization remains to be elucidated. In a genome-wide microarray-screen
of Flk1+ angioblasts during murine embryogenesis, the v-ets erythroblastosis
virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (Ets2) transcription factor was identified as a
potential angiogenic factor.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the role of Ets2 in endothelial cells during
atherosclerotic lesion progression toward plaque instability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In 91 patients treated for carotid artery disease, Ets2
levels showed modest correlations with capillary growth, thrombogenicity, and
rising levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα), monocyte chemoattractant protein
1, and interleukin-6 in the atherosclerotic lesions. Experiments in ApoE(-/-)
mice, using a vulnerable plaque model, showed that Ets2 expression was increased 
under atherogenic conditions and was augmented specifically in the vulnerable
versus stable lesions. In endothelial cell cultures, Ets2 expression and
activation was responsive to the atherogenic cytokine TNFα. In the murine
vulnerable plaque model, overexpression of Ets2 promoted lesion growth with
neovessel formation, hemorrhaging, and plaque destabilization. In contrast, Ets2 
silencing, using a lentiviral shRNA construct, promoted lesion stabilization. In 
vitro studies showed that Ets2 was crucial for TNFα-induced expression of
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, interleukin-6, and vascular cell adhesion
molecule 1 in endothelial cells. In addition, Ets2 promoted tube formation and
amplified TNFα-induced loss of vascular endothelial integrity. Evaluation in a
murine retina model further validated the role of Ets2 in regulating vessel
inflammation and endothelial leakage.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first evidence for the plaque-destabilizing role of
Ets2 in atherosclerosis development by induction of an intraplaque
proinflammatory phenotype in endothelial cells.

PMID: 21700929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Acta Med Croatica. 2010 Oct;64(4):237-45.

[Does Lp-PLA2 determination help predict atherosclerosis and
cardiocerebrovascular disease?].

[Article in Croatian]

Sertić J(1), Skorić B, Lovrić J, Bozina T, Reiner Z.

Author information: 
(1)Klinicki zavod za laboratorijsku dijagnostiku, Medicinski fakultet Sveucilista
u Zagrebu i Klinicki bolnicki centar Zagreb, Hrvatska.

Thorough control of risk factors is pivotal for cardiocerebrovascular diseases.
As classic risk assessment accounts for only 50% of risk variability and due to
the role of inflammatory processes in endothelial dysfunction and atherosclerotic
plaque rupture, it is necessary to identify new biomarkers for risk prediction.
In addition to the inflammatory marker high sensibility C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP), lipoprotein associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) is gaining increasing
significance, since it is directly involved in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerotic plaque progression. Lp-PLA2 is highly specific for vascular
inflammation, has low biological variability, and plays a causative role in
atherosclerotic plaque inflammation. It belongs to the group of intracellular and
secretory phospholipase enzymes that can hydrolyze sn-2 phospholipid ester bond
of cellular membranes and lipoproteins. Lp-PLA2 enzyme is formed by macrophages
and foam cells in atherosclerotic plaque, and is associated primarily with LDL
particles in blood. Lp-PLA2 that is bound to LDL is the sole enzyme responsible
for hydrolysis of oxidized phospholipids (oxPL) on LDL particles. Lp-PLA2
hydrolyzes oxPL at the surface of lipoproteins, but has weak activity against
non-oxPL. Lp-PLA2 is also the enzyme that hydrolyzes oxPL on HDL particles, where
it may have a role in the antioxidative function of HDL. The distribution of
Lp-PLA2 between LDL and HDL particles depends on the extent of Lp-PLA2
glycosylation, which may affect the activity of Lp-PLA2 in plasma. Stable
atherosclerotic plaques contain few inflammatory cells and a small amount of
Lp-PLA2. In contrast, unstable plaques most often do not have significant impact 
on arterial lumen but may be detected by its thin connective tissue cap, low
collagen and high lipid content. A distinguishing factor between stable and
unstable atherosclerotic plaque may also be the presence of activated
inflammatory cells and increased Lp-PLA2 concentration in unstable plaque. These 
new insights indicate that Lp-PLA2 may be a risk factor, which is important for
the formation of atherosclerotic plaque but also for its rupture. The purpose of 
applying markers of inflammation is to improve stratification of patients at
risk, so that treatment intensity may be adjusted to the risk level. Lp-PLA2
inhibition is associated with decreased cytokines. Lipid-affecting drugs
stabilize atherosclerotic plaque by reducing the central lipid core, decreasing
macrophage infiltration, and thickening of the connective tissue cap. These drugs
reduce Lp-PLA2 concentration and the frequency of cardiocerebrovascular events as
well. Besides acting as a specific marker of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation,
Lp-PLA2 has a significant prognostic value because of its direct role in the
formation of rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaque, unlike classic risk factors,
for example lipid measurement or vascular imaging, which do not directly estimate
acute ischemic potential in the arterial wall. Studies have demonstrated
correlation between increased Lp-PLA2 concentrations and enhanced risk of
cardiocerebrovascular events, even after multivariate adjustment to classic risk 
factors. In addition to its high specificity for vascular inflammation, Lp-PLA2
concentration is stable in terms of time, unlike, for instance, CRP levels.
Lp-PLA2 has been confirmed as an independent risk predictor, which is
complementary to hsCRP. It could be used in clinical practice for improved risk
assessment in patients with transient cardiocerebrovascular risk, particularly in
those with metabolic syndrome (obese patients with mixed dyslipidemia,
hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and arterial hypertension). Lp-PLA2 levels
allow for further risk stratification of high-risk patients into a very high risk
group where more aggressive therapy is recommended, as well as the achievement of
LDL-cholesterol levels < 2.5 or, even better, < 2.0 mmol/L as a feasible
therapeutic target. Similar to hsCRP, the levels of Lp-PLA2 are reduced by
lipid-affecting drugs, while its low concentrations are associated with a very
low risk of cardiocerebrovascular events both in low- and high-risk population.
According to recent American guidelines for assessing the risk of cardiovascular 
disease, Lp-PLA2 determination is recommended as an additional marker to the
classic risk assessment in patients with moderate and high risk.

PMID: 21688606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Cardiol. 2011 Sep;58(2):151-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2011.04.005. Epub 2011 Jun
14.

Elevated concentrations of pentraxin 3 are associated with coronary plaque
vulnerability.

Soeki T(1), Niki T, Kusunose K, Bando S, Hirata Y, Tomita N, Yamaguchi K, Koshiba
K, Yagi S, Taketani Y, Iwase T, Yamada H, Wakatsuki T, Akaike M, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
soeki@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is a critical contributing factor to the development and
progression of atherosclerosis. Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is produced abundantly in
atherosclerotic lesions while C-reactive protein (CRP) is mainly produced in the 
liver. In this study, we investigated whether plasma levels of PTX3 might be a
sensitive marker both for the severity of coronary artery disease and vulnerable 
plaques. Next, we determined whether assays for inflammatory molecules can be
used to monitor the therapeutic effects of telmisartan on stabilization of
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We measured PTX3 concentrations in the peripheral and
coronary sinus plasma of 40 patients with angina pectoris (AP) and 20 control
subjects. Next, in 28 patients with AP, we determined the correlation between
levels of inflammatory molecules and the computed tomography (CT) density of
plaques as a quantitative index of plaque vulnerability. There was no significant
difference in peripheral plasma PTX3 concentrations between patients with AP and 
control subjects, while coronary sinus plasma PTX3 concentrations were
significantly higher in AP patients than control subjects. The concentrations of 
PTX3 in coronary sinus and peripheral plasma correlated with Gensini scores as an
index of severity of coronary atherosclerosis. Interestingly, there was a
significantly negative correlation between plasma PTX3 concentrations and CT
density (r=-0.67, p<0.01). On the other hand, CT density did not correlate with
the peripheral plasma concentrations of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP-1) or high-sensitivity CRP (hsCRP). Furthermore, telmisartan treatment for 6
months decreased plasma concentrations of PTX3 but not those of MCP-1 or hsCRP in
12 patients with essential hypertension. Multivariate regression analysis
revealed that changes in PTX3 levels were independent of blood pressure changes.
CONCLUSIONS: PTX3 is likely more specific than hsCRP as an indicator of coronary 
plaque vulnerability that could lead to plaque rupture.

Copyright © 2011 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21676590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Thromb Res. 2011 Aug;128(2):117-23. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2011.03.025. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

The nuclear factor--kappa B pathway in atherosclerosis: a potential therapeutic
target for atherothrombotic vascular disease.

Pamukcu B(1), Lip GY, Shantsila E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Birmingham Centre for Cardiovascular Sciences, City Hospital,
Birmingham, B18 7QH England, United Kingdom.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) is a transcription factor belonging to 'Rel' family
that represents a crucial intracellular signal transduction system involved in
several inflammatory diseases including atherosclerosis. Activation of NFκB
mediated signal transduction has been established at different stages of
atherosclerosis, beginning from plaque formation to its destabilization and
rupture. The NFκB pathway is also involved in angiogenic, apoptotic and
neoplastic processes. Experimental studies indicate that inhibition of these
pathway may reduce inflammatory burden. The development of natural or
pharmaceutical, selective and specific inhibitors of NFκB pathway over IκB kinase
α or β, may ultimately prove to be promising anti-atherosclerotic,
anti-inflammatory, antiangiogenic and antiapoptotic therapeutic instruments that 
could potentially reduce inflammation, attenuate atherogenesis and prevent its
complications.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21636112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Aug 15;307(1-2):97-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.05.004. Epub
2011 May 31.

Histopathologic evaluation of basilar artery atherosclerosis.

Labadzhyan A(1), Csiba L, Narula N, Zhou J, Narula J, Fisher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UC Irvine, Orange, CA 92868, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There has been limited attention to pathological features of
basilar artery atherosclerosis. It has been assumed that pathology of basilar
artery atherosclerosis mimics that of other vascular beds.
METHODS: To define the nature of the basilar artery atherosclerotic lesions, we
analyzed postmortem intracranial artery samples from eight subjects with history 
of stroke.
RESULTS: Atherosclerotic lesions were present in 7/8 arteries examined, with a
mean estimated stenosis of 34%. Lumen thrombus with a disrupted fibrous cap was
seen in 1 lesion; the remaining 6 lesions revealed a thick fibrous cap.
Neovascularity and calcification were seen in 1 lesion and mild to moderate
inflammation was seen in 3 lesions. Necrotic core was present in 4/7 lesions, and
was associated with plaque rupture in the only disrupted lesion.
CONCLUSIONS: Basilar artery atherosclerotic lesions were relatively benign in
this series of patients presenting with stroke. While confirmation is needed with
larger sample size, the relative paucity of neovascularity suggests a possibly
distinctive histopathological profile.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3141079
PMID: 21624622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pharmacol Res. 2011 Dec;64(6):561-6. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 11.

Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition with tetracyclines for the treatment of
coronary artery disease.

Bench TJ(1), Jeremias A, Brown DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Cardiovascular Medicine), Stony Brook University,
Health Sciences Center T 16-080, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8171, USA.

Coronary artery disease is caused by atherosclerosis - a progressive arterial
inflammatory disease that is responsible for significant global mortality and
morbidity through the development of the acute coronary syndromes: sudden cardiac
death, acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina. These clinical entities
share a common pathophysiology: rupture of atherosclerotic plaque resulting in
abrupt complete or partial thrombotic obstruction of coronary blood flow. Matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP), through their central role in tissue remodeling and
inflammation, are secreted by inflammatory cells of the atherosclerotic plaque
and are capable of degrading all the extracellular matrix components of the
fibrous cap that separates the atherosclerotic lesion from blood flow in the
arterial lumen. Plaque rupture occurs when the circumferential tensile stresses
in the artery overwhelm the structural integrity of the progressively degraded,
thinned and weakened fibrous cap of the atherosclerotic lesion. Tetracyclines
inhibit MMPs through their ability to chelate zinc. Subantimicrobial doses of
doxycycline have been shown to reduce inflammation and inhibit MMP activity in
patients with coronary artery disease. Further investigation is warranted to
assess the potential clinical risks and benefits of MMP inhibition with
tetracyclines or other agents in the treatment of coronary artery disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21624471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Basic Res Cardiol. 2011 Sep;106(5):749-60. doi: 10.1007/s00395-011-0192-x. Epub
2011 May 25.

Necrotic cell death in atherosclerosis.

Martinet W(1), Schrijvers DM, De Meyer GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610
Antwerp, Belgium. wim.martinet@ua.ac.be

Necrosis is a type of cell death characterized by a gain in cell volume, swelling
of organelles, rupture of the plasma membrane and subsequent loss of
intracellular contents. For a long time, the process has been considered as a
merely accidental and uncontrolled form of cell death, but accumulating evidence 
suggests that it can also occur in a regulated fashion. Morphological studies
using transmission electron microscopy indicate that the vast majority of dying
cells in advanced human atherosclerotic plaques undergo necrosis. Various stimuli
in the plaque including high levels of oxidative stress, depletion of cellular
ATP, impaired clearance of apoptotic cells and increased intracellular calcium
may cause necrotic death. Although the role of necrosis in atherosclerosis
remains ill-defined, a growing body of evidence suggests that necrotic death
stimulates atherogenesis through induction of inflammation and enlargement of the
necrotic core. In addition, necrosis contributes to plaque instability by
releasing tissue factor, matrix degrading proteases and pro-angiogenic compounds.
Therapeutic agents against necrosis are limited, but efforts have recently been
made to inhibit the necrotic pathway or its pro-inflammatory effects.

PMID: 21611880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. World J Cardiol. 2011 Apr 26;3(4):101-4. doi: 10.4330/wjc.v3.i4.101.

Increased heart rate and atherosclerosis: potential implications of ivabradine
therapy.

Dominguez-Rodriguez A(1), Blanco-Palacios G, Abreu-Gonzalez P.

Author information: 
(1)Alberto Dominguez-Rodriguez, Gabriela Blanco-Palacios, Department of
Cardiology, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Tenerife, E-38320, La Laguna,
Spain. adrvdg@hotmail.com

Despite all the therapeutic advances in the field of cardiology, cardiovascular
diseases, and in particular coronary artery disease, remain the leading cause of 
death and disability worldwide, thereby underlining the importance of acquiring
new therapeutic options in this field. A reduction in elevated resting heart rate
(HR) has long been postulated as a therapeutic approach in the management of
cardiovascular disease. An increased HR has been shown to be associated with
increased progression of coronary atherosclerosis in animal models and patients. 
A high HR has also been associated with a greatly increased risk of plaque
rupture in patients with coronary atherosclerosis. Endothelial function may be an
important link between HR and atherosclerosis. An increased HR has been shown
experimentally to cause endothelial dysfunction. Inflammation plays a significant
role in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis. In the literature,
there is data that shows an association between HR and circulating markers of
vascular inflammation. In addition, HR reduction by pharmacological intervention 
with ivabradine (a selective HR-lowering agent that acts by inhibiting the
pacemaker ionic current I(f) in sinoatrial node cells) reduces the formation of
atherosclerotic plaques in animal models of lipid-induced atherosclerosis. The
aim of this editorial is to review the possible role of ivabradine on
atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3082732
PMID: 21526046  [PubMed]


224. Kardiol Pol. 2011;69(4):388-93.

[Chronic inflammation in patients with acute coronary syndrome and chronic kidney
disease].

[Article in Polish]

Owczarek A(1), Babińska M, Szyguła-Jurkiewicz B, Chudek J.

Author information: 
(1)Zakład Statystyki, Śląski Uniwersytet Medyczny w Katowicach, Sosnowiec.
aowczarek@sum.edu.pl

Chronic kidney disease is a worldwide growing problem in public health. It is a
risk factor for complications in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Diabetes, hypertension (hypertrophy and left ventricular failure), impaired
fibrinolysis and coagulation processes, as well as the rapid development of
atherosclerosis (partly associated with chronic inflammation) are responsible for
higher prevalence of cardiovascular diseases in patients with chronic kidney
disease. Inflammatory process of unknown aetiology belongs to the so-called
non-traditional risk factors in development of cardiovascular system diseases. It
is thought that this process is responsible for adverse remodelling of
atherosclerosis plaque and its instability which causes plaque rupture and as a
result a coronary syndrome occurrence. Important inflammatory mediators, which
take part in pathogenesis of ACS, are acute phase proteins such as: C-reactive
protein, adhesion molecules VCAM-1, ICAM-1, selectins, plasma amyloid A,
metalloproteinases, interleukins-1 and -6, tumour necrosis factor-a and vascular 
endothelial growth factor.

PMID: 21523678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Mar;124(6):911-7.

Imaging of atherosclerotic aorta of rabbit model by detection of plaque
inflammation with fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography/computed tomography.

Zhao QM(1), Feng TT, Zhao X, Xu ZM, Liu Y, Li DP, Li LQ, Su G, Zhang XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100029, China. Zhaoqm123@sohu.com

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is the primary mechanism of thrombosis
which plays a key role in the onset of acute coronary syndromes. Detection of
these plaques prone to rupture (vulnerable plaque) could be clinically
significant for prevention of cardiac events. It has been shown that high
metabolism cells have a high uptake of fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
((18)F-FDG). The objective of this study was to investigate the correlation of
FDG uptake and the immuno-histochemistry parameters of plaques, and the effect of
atorvastatin on vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque in a rabbit model.
METHODS: Ten male New Zealand White rabbits were divided into three groups as
follows: (1) normal control group (n = 2, C group): the animals were fed a
standard diet at 120 g/d and were given water ad labium; (2) atherosclerosis
group (n = 4, As group): animals were fed with high fat diet for 5 months after
aortic endothelia damage; (3) treatment group (atherosclerosis + atorvastatin, n 
= 4, Statin group): animals were fed with high fat diet for 5 months and then
changed into normal chow plus atorvastatin (2.5 mg·d(-1)·kg(-1)) treatment for
another 4 months. Then these four rabbits were imaged with fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) and 
sacrificed for pathohistologic studies. FDG uptake by the aorta was expressed as 
target-to-background ratio (TBR). Maximal standardized uptake value (SUV) was
measured over the thoracic and abdominal aortas. The aortic smooth muscle cell
(SMC) number, CD-14 antibody positive cell (macrophage) number and the ratio of
the thickness of fibrous cap to the thickness of lipid core (cap-to-core ratio)
in atherosclerotic plaques were analyzed.
RESULTS: As group showed significantly higher uptake of FDG than C group (SUVs:
0.746 ± 0.172 vs. 0.286 ± 0.073, P < 0.001). After 4 months of atorvastatin
treatment and the modification of diet, SUVs decreased significantly (Statin
group: 0.550 ± 0.134, compared to As group, P < 0.001). However, no marked
difference was found in TBR, the number of macrophages, the number of SMC and the
cap-to-core ratio in the aortic segments between Statin group and As group. The
correlation of aortic FDG uptake with SMC assessed by histopathology was
negatively significant (r = -0.57, P < 0.001). When aortic FDG uptake was
expressed as TBR, it correlated significantly (r = 0.69, P < 0.001) with the
macrophage number, and also correlated significantly (r = -0.78, P < 0.001) with 
the cap-to-core ratio.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET/CT might serve as a useful non-invasive imaging
technique for detection of atherosclerotic plaque and potentially permit
monitoring of relative changes in inflammation within the atherosclerotic lesion.

PMID: 21518602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. FASEB J. 2011 Aug;25(8):2515-27. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-181149. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

MicroRNAs regulating oxidative stress and inflammation in relation to obesity and
atherosclerosis.

Hulsmans M(1), De Keyzer D, Holvoet P.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis and Metabolism Unit, Department of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Herestraat 49, O&N1, PB 705, B-3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

A primary event in atherogenesis is the infiltration of activated inflammatory
cells into the arterial wall. There they secrete reactive oxygen species and
oxidize lipoproteins, inducing foam cell formation and endothelial cell
apoptosis, which in turn lead to plaque growth, erosion, and rupture. In
addition, there is evidence that this vicious circle between oxidative stress and
inflammation occurs not only in the diseased arterial wall but also in adipose
tissues in obesity. In this condition, oxidative stress and inflammation impair
adipocyte maturation, resulting in defective insulin action and adipocytokine
signaling. This observation raises questions regarding what molecules are
probably common regulators of these pathogenic processes in adipose and vascular 
tissues. Candidates are small, noncoding, microRNAs (miRs) that control gene
expression by inducing mRNA degradation or blocking translation. This review
summarizes recent insights into the roles of miRs in regulation of oxidative
stress and inflammation in vascular and adipose tissues. It emphasizes the role
of miR-containing microvesicles in the interaction between inflammatory cells and
endothelial cells within these tissues and in communication between these
tissues, possibly explaining the similarity and the simultaneity of molecular
changes and interactions in adipose and vascular tissues.

PMID: 21507901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Thromb Haemost. 2011 May;105 Suppl 1:S34-42. doi: 10.1160/THS10-11-0717. Epub
2011 Apr 11.

Update on lipids, inflammation and atherothrombosis.

Badimon L(1), Storey RF, Vilahur G.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, c/Sant Antoni Ma. Claret 167, Barcelona,
Spain. lbadimon@csic-iccc.org

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease that involves the arterial wall and is
characterised by the progressive accumulation of lipids in the vessel wall. The
first step is the internalisation of lipids (LDL) in the intima with endothelial 
activation which enhances the permeability of the endothelial layer and the
expression of cytokines/chemokines and adhesion molecules. These events increase 
LDL particles accumulation in the extracellular matrix where they aggregate/fuse,
are retained by proteoglycans and become targets for oxidative and enzymatic
modifications. In turn, retained pro-atherogenic LDLs enhance selective leukocyte
recruitment and attachment to the endothelial layer inducing their transmigration
across the endothelium into the intima. While smooth muscle cell numbers decline 
with the severity of plaque progression, monocytes differentiate into
macrophages, a process associated with the upregulation of pattern recognition
receptors including scavenger receptors and Toll-like receptors leading to foam
cell formation. Foam cells release growth factors, cytokines, metalloproteinases 
and reactive oxygen species all of which perpetuate and amplify the vascular
remodelling process. In addition, macrophages release tissue factor that, upon
plaque rupture, contributes to thrombus formation. Smooth muscle cells exposed in
eroded lesions are also able to internalise LDL through LRP-1 receptors acquiring
a pro-thrombotic phenotype and releasing tissue factor. Platelets recognise
ligands in the ruptured or eroded atherosclerotic plaque, initiate platelet
activation and aggregation leading to thrombosis and to the clinical
manifestation of the atherothrombotic disease. Additionally, platelets contribute
to the local inflammatory response and may also participate in progenitor cell
recruitment.

PMID: 21479344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Cardiol. 2012 Oct 4;160(2):89-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.03.030. Epub
2011 Apr 3.

Markers of inflammation in relation to long-term cardiovascular mortality in
patients with lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease.

Urbonaviciene G(1), Frystyk J, Flyvbjerg A, Urbonavicius S, Henneberg EW,
Lindholt JS.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Unit, Department of Vascular Surgery, Viborg Hospital,
Denmark. Grazina.urbonaviciene@sun.au.dk

BACKGROUND: Elevated levels of inflammatory mediators reflect vascular
inflammation, and play a significant role in the genesis of atherosclerosis,
plaque instability and rupture.
METHODS AND MATERIAL: Plasma α-defensin and serum high sensitivity C reactive
protein (hs-CRP) levels were examined in 463 patients with lower-extremity
peripheral arterial disease (PAD). The relationships between inflammatory markers
and lethal outcome were examined by Cox regression, and receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 126 patients died, hereof 59 of cardiovascular causes. The
patients with chronic critical limb ischemia (CLI) at baseline had significantly 
higher α-defensin and hs-CRP levels compared with patients with intermittent
claudication (IC). For patients with IC, the relative risk for cardiovascular
mortality was three times higher in patients within the upper tertile of
α-defensin concentration (>162 μg/l), when compared with those in the two lower
tertiles (HR 3.04 95% CI 1.26-7.32). The multivariable model revealed that
IC-patients with high α-defensin and high hs-CRP concentration had more than 5
times higher risk for cardiovascular mortality than those with either high
α-defensin or high hs-CRP alone, and low α-defensin or low hs-CRP concentrations 
(HR 5.16, 95% CI 1.78-14.8). Area under the ROC curve for combined use of high
values of α-defensin and hs-CRP was 0.71 (95% CI 0.57-0.85). The addition of
α-defensin or hs-CRP to conventional risk factors significantly improved the
accuracy of risk prediction model for cardiovascular mortality. No associations
were found among α-defensin, hs-CRP, and lethal outcome for patients with CLI.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined analysis of α-defensin and hs-CRP, adds prognostic
information with regard to the long-term cardiovascular prognosis among patients 
with IC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21463908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol. 2011 Jul-Aug;3(4):376-88. doi:
10.1002/wnan.139. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Optical molecular imaging of atherosclerosis using nanoparticles: shedding new
light on the darkness.

Douma K(1), Megens RT, van Zandvoort MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, The Netherlands. K.Douma@maastrichtuniversity.nl

The application of optical nanoparticles in cardiovascular research is increasing
because of the high spatiotemporal resolution and high sensitivity of optical
techniques as compared with other imaging platforms. The major cause of
cardiovascular events is atherosclerosis, which is a chronic inflammation of the 
arterial wall. Interestingly, the composition rather than the size of nonstenotic
atherosclerotic plaques and severe plaques with >90% stenosis are indicators for 
high-risk vulnerability to rupture and acute cardiovascular events. Optical
techniques may be highly suitable for discriminating, at subcellular resolution, 
the different stages of plaque progression by targeting bright and nontoxic
optical nanoparticles toward distinct molecular epitopes in order to distinguish 
vulnerable from stable atherosclerotic plaques. Several optical techniques
including two-photon laser scanning microscopy (TPLSM), optical coherence
tomography (OCT), and photoacoustic imaging (PAI) have been applied for (in vivo)
characterization of atherosclerotic plaques, in addition to investigate their
feasibility in the clinical setting. Optical nanoparticles, however, have
predominantly been used in optical molecular imaging of tumors, but their
application in cardiovascular research is increasing. In this review, we first
describe shortly the basics of the mentioned optical techniques. Then, we detail 
on the most-extensively studied optical nanoparticles and relatively new optical 
nanoparticles that hold promise for in vivo applications in atherosclerosis
research.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 21448988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 1;91(1):37-44. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr057. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Inhibition of rupture of established atherosclerotic plaques by treatment with
apolipoprotein A-I.

Reimers GJ(1), Jackson CL, Rickards J, Chan PY, Cohn JS, Rye KA, Barter PJ,
Rodgers KJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Research Institute, 7 Eliza Street, Newtown NSW 2042, Australia.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 1;91(1):3-4.

AIMS: Plasma concentrations of high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol
correlate inversely with the incidence of myocardial infarction in humans. We
investigated the effect of treatment with human apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), the 
principal protein of HDL, on plaque disruption in an animal model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Seventy apolipoprotein E knockout mice were induced to
develop atherosclerotic lesions in the brachiocephalic artery by feeding a
high-fat diet for 9 weeks. Mice then received twice-weekly treatment with human
apoA-I (8 mg/kg) or vehicle, for 2 weeks. The incidence of acute plaque
disruption was reduced by 65% in mice receiving apoA-I (P < 0.01). Plaques in
treated mice had a more stable phenotype, with an increase in smooth muscle cell 
(SMC): macrophage ratio (P = 0.05), principally the consequence of an increase in
the number of SMC in plaques. In the fibrous cap, there were reductions in matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (-69%, P < 0.0001) and S100A4, a marker of SMC
de-differentiation (-60%, P < 0.0001). These results indicate that 2 weeks of
treatment with small amounts of human apoA-I produces more stable plaques in a
mouse model.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with apoA-I has the potential to stabilize plaques and
prevent plaque rupture in humans.

PMID: 21354994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2011 Jun;13(3):200-7. doi: 10.1007/s11906-011-0195-x.

Vascular mechanisms in the pathogenesis of stroke.

Sierra C(1), Coca A, Schiffrin EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital and Lady
Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University, 3755 Côte-Ste-Catherine 
Road, Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada. csierra@clinic.ub.es

Stroke is one of the most devastating manifestations of two common diseases,
atherosclerosis and hypertension. It represents the second leading cause of death
and a major cause of disability worldwide. Besides age (a nonmodifiable risk
factor), hypertension is the most important cardiovascular risk factor for
developing both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, as well as small vessel disease 
predisposing to lacunar infarction, white matter lesions, and cerebral
microbleeds. In addition, hypertension predisposes to atherosclerosis and cardiac
diseases (notably atrial fibrillation), thereby promoting cerebral embolism.
Inflammatory mechanisms play a central role in the pathogenesis and progression
of atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, thrombosis, and stroke. Endothelial
dysfunction, in part resulting from excessive production of reactive oxygen
species, is an important mechanism of cerebrovascular damage. This article
reviews recent data on vascular mechanisms that participate in the pathogenesis
of stroke.

PMID: 21331606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Med Hypotheses. 2011 May;76(5):627-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.01.014. Epub 2011 
Feb 1.

Id1: a novel therapeutic target for patients with atherosclerotic plaque rupture.

Wang G(1), Qiu J, Hu J, Tang C, Yin T.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, Chongqing University,
Ministry of Education, Bioengineering College of Chongqing University, Chongqing 
400044, China. wanggx@cqu.edu.cn

Plaque neovascularization and inflammation are responsible for plaque
destabilization and rupture. However, the precise triggers for inflammation and
neovascularization in atherosclerosis are largely unknown. Id1 (inhibitor of
DNA-binding) protein is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor and plays an
important role in angiogenesis and inflammation. The expression of Id1 can be
up-regulated by plaque formation factors such as vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), hypoxia, NAD(P)H oxidase, and TNF-alpha. Moreover, Id1 is critical
to endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) population formation and angiogenesis.
Evidence from diverse sources has suggested that Id1 may affect plaque
destabilization through angiogenesis and inflammation. Herein we hypothesize that
Id1 is an important protein for the development and progression of
atherosclerotic plaque destabilization and hence blocking the expression of Id1
may serve as new targets for antiatherogenic therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21288647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Pharmacol Rep. 2010 Nov-Dec;62(6):1108-16.

Effects of standard treatment on the dynamics of matrix metalloproteinases gene
expression in patients with acute coronary syndromes.

Kułach A(1), Dąbek J, Głogowska-Ligus J, Garczorz W, Gąsior Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Silesia, Ziołowa 47, PL 40-635
Katowice, Poland. andrzejkulach@gmail.com

Inflammation plays a critical role in the pathology of acute coronary syndrome
(ACS). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)--proteolytic enzymes participating in
plaque destabilization--are the crucial effectors of proinflammatory mechanisms
leading to plaque rupture. Numerous reports have confirmed the significance of
these factors both in circulating blood and locally in the plaque. There is,
however, a lack of information on the molecular mechanisms leading to these
disturbances, and the effect of standard treatment for ACS on these processes.
The aim of the study was to assess the gene expression of MMP-2, -9 and TIMP-2,
and the effect of standard treatment on the expression of the studied genes. The 
study was conducted in 32 patients with ACS and 15 healthy subjects (control
group). Monocytes were isolated using Rosette-Sep kits. Gene expression of MMP-2,
MMP-9 and TIMP-2 was evaluated on days 1 and 5 in the studied group and once in
controls. Total mRNA was extracted from monocytes and the number of mRNA copies
was assessed by QRT-PCR. Monocytes of ACS patients present with significantly
higher gene expression of MMP-2, -9 and TIMP-2 compared to healthy controls
(0.0915 ± 0.037 vs. 0.001 ± 0.0002, p < 0.01; 0.81 ± 0.279 vs. 0.10 ± 0.057, p < 
0.05; 0.84 ± 0.140 vs. 0.42 ± 0.126, p < 0.05, respectively). After the 5-day
standard treatment, a significant decrease in MMP-2 gene expression was observed.
Other studied genes did not show relevant changes during the observation period. 
No significant correlation was found between classical atherosclerosis risk
factors and the expression of the studied genes. Monocytes of ACS patients
significantly overexpressed MMP-2, MMP-9 and TIMP-2. Five days of standard
treatment resulted in downregulation of the MMP-2 gene. MMP gene overexpression
appears to be an independent factor concerning the pathogenesis of ACS.

PMID: 21273668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2011 Apr;13(2):162-9. doi: 10.1007/s11883-010-0159-7.

The role of matrix metalloproteinases in atherothrombosis.

Ketelhuth DF(1), Bäck M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Daniel.Ketelhuth@ki.se

The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of enzymes is involved in arterial wall
extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling. The latter activities have been 
implicated in a number of normal and pathologic processes, such as
atherosclerotic lesion formation and progression, plaque destabilization and
rupture, but also in plaque stabilization and healing. As a result, the MMPs have
been explored as both therapeutic targets and diagnostic tools for the treatment 
and diagnosis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases. In this review, we
summarize experimental findings, genetic associations, and the biomarker
potential of MMPs in atherothrombosis. In addition, the regulation and expression
of MMPs in atherosclerotic plaques is discussed, with an emphasis on the role of 
lipid-derived inflammatory mediators as modulators of MMP activity.

PMID: 21271310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Mar;215(1):52-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.12.009. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Porphyromonas gingivalis accelerates inflammatory atherosclerosis in the
innominate artery of ApoE deficient mice.

Hayashi C(1), Viereck J, Hua N, Phinikaridou A, Madrigal AG, Gibson FC 3rd,
Hamilton JA, Genco CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, Boston University
School of Medicine, 650 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, United States.
hayashi@bu.edu

OBJECTIVE: Studies in humans support a role for the oral pathogen Porphyromonas
gingivalis in the development of inflammatory atherosclerosis. The goal of this
study was to determine if P. gingivalis infection accelerates inflammation and
atherosclerosis in the innominate artery of mice, an artery which has been
reported to exhibit many features of human atherosclerotic disease, including
plaque rupture.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Apolipoprotein E-deficient (ApoE-/-) mice were orally
infected with P. gingivalis, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to
monitor the progression of atherosclerosis in live mice. P. gingivalis infected
mice exhibited a statistically significant increase in atherosclerotic plaque in 
the innominate artery as compared to uninfected mice. Polarized light microscopy 
and immunohistochemistry revealed that the innominate arteries of infected mice
had increased lipids, macrophages and T cells as compared to uninfected mice.
Increases in plaque, total cholesterol esters and cholesterol monohydrate
crystals, macrophages, and T cells were prevented by immunization with
heat-killed P. gingivalis prior to pathogen exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: These are the first studies to demonstrate progression of
inflammatory plaque accumulation in the innominate arteries by in vivo MRI
analysis following pathogen exposure, and to document protection from plaque
progression in the innominate artery via immunization.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3057233
PMID: 21251656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nihon Rinsho. 2011 Jan;69(1):79-84.

[Anti-atherosclerotic and anti-inflammatory effects of statin on cardiovascular
disease and their mechanisms].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishibashi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ohara Medical Center Hospital.

Inflammation plays a central role in the development of atherosclerosis and
plaque rupture. Statin not only inhibits cholesterol synthesis but also elicits
pleiotropic effects by blocking mevalonate pathyway and the isoprenylation of
small GTPases which are involved in vascular responses. High sensitive C-reactive
protein (hsCRP) is a prognostic biomarker for vascular inflammation. JUPITER
trial focusing on hsCRP has shown that inflammation is a key player for
cardiovascular disease independent of cholesterol levels. Japanese clinical
trials of MEGA and MUSASHI-AMI also demonstrated that statin is beneficial for
primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events via both
cholesterol-lowering and pleiotropic effects. Our recent animal study of
intravenous administration of pravastatin supports the rapid pleiotropic effects 
of statin beyond cholesterol-lowering.

PMID: 21226265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Brain Nerve. 2010 Dec;62(12):1269-75.

[Pathophysiology of carotid stenosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamazaki M(1), Uchiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Carotid stenosis is an important cause of atherothrombotic cerebral infarction.
Moreover, it reflects the severity of systemic atherosclerosis and is a useful
predictor of cardiovascular events. Atherosclerotic changes often develop at the 
site of carotid bifurcation, where shear stress can easily induce endothelial
cell damage. The extent of this damage depends on various risk factors such as
hypertension, dyslipidemia, and diabetes mellitus. Endothelial cell dysfunction
induces the accumulation of inflammatory cells, migration and proliferation of
smooth muscle cells, and release of various cytokines and chemokines, which cause
carotid plaques and stenosis. Carotid plaques consist of a lipid core with
infiltration inflammatory cells covered with a fibrous cap. Cerebral infarction
occurs as a result of rupture and thrombus formation on the surface of the
carotid plaque by thromboembolic and hemodynamic mechanisms. Rupture-prone
carotid plaques are called vulnerable or unstable plaques. The characteristics of
vulnerable plaques are active inflammation, with extensive macrophage
accumulation, a thin cap with a large lipid core, endothelial denudation with
superficial platelet aggregation, fissures, and severe stenosis. To assess the
risk of cardiovascular events, it is important to identify vulnerable plaques by 
imaging techniques and novel assays such as the high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein assay. In patients at a high risk of developing cerebral infarction,
carotid endoarterectomy or stenting with the best medical treatment is useful in 
reducing cerebrovascular events.

PMID: 21139179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Clin Lipidol. 2010 May-Jun;4(3):156-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2010.03.003. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

Cholesterol crystals piercing the arterial plaque and intima trigger local and
systemic inflammation.

Abela GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, and Division of Pathology,
Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, B208 Clinical Center, East
Lansing, MI, USA. george.abela@ht.msu.edu

The response to arterial wall injury is an inflammatory process, which over time 
becomes integral to the development of atherosclerosis and subsequent plaque
instability. However, the underlying injurious agent, critical to this process,
has not received much attention. In this review, a model of plaque rupture is
hypothesized with two stages of inflammatory activity. In stage I (cholesterol
crystal-induced cell injury and apoptosis), intracellular cholesterol crystals
induce foam cell apoptosis, setting up a vicious cycle by signaling more
macrophages, resulting in accumulation of extra cellular lipids. This local
inflammation eventually leads to the formation of a semi-liquid, lipid-rich
necrotic core of a vulnerable plaque. In stage II (cholesterol crystal-induced
arterial wall injury), the saturated lipid core is now primed for
crystallization, which can manifest as a clinical syndrome with a systemic
inflammation response. Cholesterol crystallization is the trigger that causes
core expansion, leading to intimal injury. We recently demonstrated that when
cholesterol crystallizes from a liquid to a solid state, it undergoes volume
expansion, which can tear the plaque cap. This observation of cholesterol
crystals perforating the cap and intimal surface was made in the plaques of
patients who died with acute coronary syndrome. We have also demonstrated that
several agents (ie, statins, aspirin, and ethanol) can dissolve cholesterol
crystals and may be exerting their immediate benefits by this direct mechanism.
Also, because recent studies have demonstrated that high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein may be a reliable marker in selecting patients for statin therapy, it
could reflect the presence of intimal injury by cholesterol crystals. This was
demonstrated in an atherosclerotic rabbit model. Therefore, we propose that
cholesterol crystallization could help explain in part both local and systemic
inflammation associated with atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2010 National Lipid Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21122648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Histol Histopathol. 2011 Jan;26(1):1-11.

Neutrophil infiltration and oxidant-production in human atherosclerotic carotid
plaques.

Hosokawa T(1), Kumon Y, Kobayashi T, Enzan H, Nishioka Y, Yuri K, Wakiguchi H,
Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku,
Kochi, Japan.

To clarify the clinical implications of neutrophils in vulnerable plaques we
evaluated the function and activity of infiltrated neutrophils in an
atherosclerotic plaque, focusing on oxidant production. A histopathological
investigation was performed using carotid arterial samples obtained from seven
patients. The atherosclerotic plaques were examined cytochemically for
naphthol-ASD-chloroacetate esterase activity and oxidant-production, and
immunohistochemically using N-formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (fPRL1)-, CD66b-,
CD68- or p22phox-specific antibodies. The cytoplasmic fPRL1 intensity value of
the neutrophils in the plaque was estimated using an activity index.
Naphthol-ASD-chloroacetate esterase activity was found in cells located in the
atherosclerotic plaque, indicating that the cells were neutrophils. The
cytoplasmic fPRL1 intensity value of the neutrophils in the plaque decreased to
approximately 60% of the intensity observed in the capillary vessels.
Oxidant-production was also detected in the plaques, and both neutrophils and
macrophages were observed at the corresponding oxidant-production sites. p22phox 
expression was also located in the same areas in which oxidant-production was
observed in these plaques. We could not directly evaluate how much ROS generated 
from the infiltrated neutrophils contributed the plaque vulnerability followed by
its rupture. However, the infiltrated neutrophils in the atherosclerotic plaques 
morphologically appeared activated and were actively generating oxidant, implying
that neutrophils, together with macrophages, infiltrate into atherosclerotic
plaques and contribute to plaque vulnerability.

PMID: 21117022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):157-64. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq369. Epub 2010 Nov
23.

GPR92/LPA₅ lysophosphatidate receptor mediates megakaryocytic cell shape change
induced by human atherosclerotic plaques.

Khandoga AL(1), Pandey D, Welsch U, Brandl R, Siess W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Prevention of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

AIMS: Oxidative processes and vascular inflammation underlying atherosclerosis
lead to an accumulation of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) molecules in the
atheromatous intima. LPA, a platelet-activating component of human
atherosclerotic plaques, possibly contributes to atherothrombus formation after
plaque rupture. Human platelets express mRNA for the G protein-coupled receptors 
LPA₁₋₇ that derive from megakaryocytes. The aim of our study was to identify the 
functional LPA receptor(s) in human platelets by silencing individual LPA
receptors in megakaryocytic (MK) cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied shape change of two human MK cell lines (Meg-01, 
Dami) by turbidometry, phase-contrast and scanning electron microscopy. They
showed upon LPA stimulation a rapid, Rho-kinase-mediated shape change similar to 
that of human platelets. By qRT-PCR analysis we found expression of LPA₁₋₇ in
both cell lines; LPA₄ and LPA₅ were the most abundant receptor transcripts. In
both Meg-01 and Dami cells, the rank order of activation by LPA species was
similar to that found in platelets: alkyl-LPA 18:1 > alkyl-LPA 16:0 > acyl-LPA
18:1 >> alkyl-LPA 18:0. Knock-down of individual LPA receptors by siRNA showed
that LPA-mediated activation of MK cells was mediated by LPA₅, but not by
LPA₁₋₄,₆,₇. Importantly, we found that human atherosclerotic plaque and
lipid-rich core induced shape change of Dami cells, and that this effect was
inhibited after LPA₅ silencing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that LPA₅ mediates LPA-induced shape change of
MK cells and support its involvement in atherosclerotic plaque and lipid-rich
core-mediated platelet activation. This receptor could be an attractive novel
target for antithrombotic therapy.

PMCID: PMC3058733
PMID: 21106562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Intern Med. 2011 Feb;269(2):200-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02304.x. Epub
2010 Nov 14.

Expression of fatty acid-binding protein 4/aP2 is correlated with plaque
instability in carotid atherosclerosis.

Agardh HE(1), Folkersen L, Ekstrand J, Marcus D, Swedenborg J, Hedin U,
Gabrielsen A, Paulsson-Berne G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Experimental Cardiovascular Research, Karolinska
Institutet Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: the molecular basis for atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability with high
risk of plaque rupture and thromboembolism is complex. We investigated whether
clinical estimates of plaque stability correlate with differentially expressed
mRNA transcripts within the lesion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: endarterectomy samples from patients undergoing surgery for 
symptomatic and asymptomatic carotid stenosis were prospectively collected and
clinical parameters recorded in the Biobank of Karolinska Carotid
Endarterectomies. mRNA expression profiling (n = 40) and quantitative RT-PCR (n =
105) revealed increased levels of fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4/aP2) in
lesions from patients with recent symptoms of plaque instability compared to
asymptomatic patients (array: FC = 2, P < 0.05; RT-PCR: P < 0.05). At the mRNA
level, FABP4/aP2 correlated with the cell markers CD36, CD68 and CD163 of
monocyte/macrophage lineage as well as with CD4-positive T cells. FABP4/aP2 mRNA 
expression was also correlated with enzymes of the leukotriene pathway,
5-lipoxygenase and leukotriene A4 hydrolase. In addition, analysis of transcript 
profiles identified CD52 and adipophilin as the mRNAs with the highest
correlation with FABP4/aP2. Expression of FABP4/aP2 by macrophages and CD52 by T 
cells in the lesion was confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: expression of FABP4/aP2 is increased at the mRNA level in unstable
carotid plaques. Immunohistochemical analyses showed localization of FABP4/aP2 to
macrophage populations. These FABP4/aP2-positive macrophages constitute an
important and prevalent phenotype and could provide a new link between
scavenging-mediated lipid uptake and cellular metabolic stress in plaque. In
addition FABP4/aP2 correlates with other important signs of inflammation and
plaque instability, such as T cells and leukotriene enzymes. Taken together,
these results indicate that FABP4/aP2 is a key factor connecting vascular and
cellular lipid accumulation to inflammation.

PMID: 21073559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3268-79. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040619. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

Invariant natural killer T cells: linking inflammation and neovascularization in 
human atherosclerosis.

Kyriakakis E(1), Cavallari M, Andert J, Philippova M, Koella C, Bochkov V, Erne
P, Wilson SB, Mori L, Biedermann BC, Resink TJ, De Libero G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Signal Transduction, Department of Biomedicine, Basel
University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Atherosclerosis, a chronic inflammatory lipid storage disease of large arteries, 
is complicated by cardiovascular events usually precipitated by plaque rupture or
erosion. Inflammation participates in lesion progression and plaque rupture.
Identification of leukocyte populations involved in plaque destabilization is
important for effective prevention of cardiovascular events. This study
investigates CD1d-expressing cells and invariant NKT cells (iNKT) in human
arterial tissue, their correlation with disease severity and symptoms, and
potential mechanisms for their involvement in plaque formation and/or
destabilization. CD1d-expressing cells were present in advanced plaques in
patients who suffered from cardiovascular events in the past and were most
abundant in plaques with ectopic neovascularization. Confocal microscopy detected
iNKT cells in plaques, and plaque-derived iNKT cell lines promptly produced
proinflammatory cytokines when stimulated by CD1d-expressing APC-presenting
α-galactosylceramide lipid antigen. Furthermore, iNKT cells were diminished in
the circulating blood of patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis. Activated
iNKT cell-derived culture supernatants showed angiogenic activity in a human
microvascular endothelial cell line HMEC-1-spheroid model of in vitro
angiogenesis and strongly activated human microvascular endothelial cell line
HMEC-1 migration. This functional activity was ascribed to IL-8 released by iNKT 
cells upon lipid recognition. These findings introduce iNKT cells as novel
cellular candidates promoting plaque neovascularization and destabilization in
human atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21061446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Ann Med. 2011 Mar;43(2):90-103. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.523711. Epub 2010 Nov 
2.

Tumor necrosis factor superfamily molecules in acute coronary syndromes.

Aukrust P(1), Sandberg WJ, Otterdal K, Vinge LE, Gullestad L, Yndestad A,
Halvorsen B, Ueland T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. pal.aukrust@rikshospiatlet.no

Accumulating evidence suggests that inflammatory pathways play an essential role 
in all stages of atherogenesis. Inflammatory processes are not only involved in
plaque progression, but seem also to play a critical role in plaque rupture.
Members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamiliy are potent regulators of 
inflammation and cell survival and consist of 20 ligands that signal through 29
different receptors. Several lines of evidence suggest that TNF-related molecules
are involved in the development of acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Most,
convincing evidence exists for CD40 ligand-CD40 interaction, but several other
members of the TNF superfamily seem also to be involved in this immune-mediated
promotion of plaque instability, including LIGHT, receptor activator of nuclear
factor κB ligand, and TNF-α. These plaque destabilization pathways involve the
bidirectional interaction between platelets and endothelial cells/monocytes,
activation of vascular smooth muscle cells, and co-stimulatory effects on T
cells, promoting inflammation, thrombus formation, matrix degradation, and
apoptosis. TNF-related pathways could contribute to the non-resolving
inflammation that characterizes atherosclerosis, representing pathogenic loops
that are operating during plaque rupture and the development of ACS. These
TNF-related molecules could also represent attractive new targets for therapy in 
this disorder.

PMID: 21039303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Drugs. 2010 Nov 1;70 Suppl 1:3-8. doi: 10.2165/00000004-000000000-00000.

[Pathology of AtheroThrombosIS (ATIS)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan. maki@med.osaka−cu.ac.jp

Once atherosclerosis develops, stenosis (or occlusion) may occur in the lumen of 
various arteries of the living body. This can lead to a range of conditions,
including myocardial infarction, cerebral infarction, aortic aneurysm and
peripheral artery disease. The acronym 'ATIS' (AtheroThrombosIS) is a collective 
term for diseases characterized by a common course of development based on
atherosclerosis. This article reviews pathological findings in atherothrombotic
lesions of human coronary, carotid, and vertebrobasilar arteries as well as leg
arteries and veins. Histologically, atheromatous plaques of coronary arteries can
broadly be typed as fibrous and lipid-rich (atheromatous). Macroscopically,
fibrous plaque has a whitish appearance and is composed of smooth muscle cells
and collagen fibres. Lipid-rich (atheromatous) plaque, on the other hand, appears
yellow macroscopically, with the superficial layer (closer to the lumen) having a
white fibrous cap which covers the atheroma. This fibrous cap is quite thin and
is likely to rupture. Typical pathological features of such atherothrombosis are 
narrowing of the vascular lumen due to lipid-rich (atheromatous) plaque, and
thrombus formation due to a broken fibrous cap. Such plaque rupture is the
underlying cause of acute myocardial infarction in about 70% of patients, while
acute myocardial infarction in the remaining patients (30%) results from plaque
erosion. In cases of plaque erosion, atheroma is seldom seen, and atherosclerosis
manifests in a full-circumferential manner, resulting in thrombus formation due
to endothelial cell injury and eventually leading to obstructive thrombi. Thus,
thrombus formation associated with myocardial infarction is attributable to
plaque rupture if the lesion contains a lipid-rich (atheromatous) plaque. In
cases where plaques cause particularly intense injury of endothelial cells,
plaque erosion is likely to occur, resulting in formation of obstructive thrombi 
within the vascular lumen. Primary factors involved in the evolution of ATIS are 
injury of vascular endothelial cells, inflammation of a vulnerable plaque and
intra-plaque haemorrhage. ATIS in other vascular systems has similar pathological
features. The continued increase in the aged population and the morbidity of
lifestyle-related diseases will make more cases of ATIS intractable. It will be
of paramount importance to prevent intractable ATIS in the future.

PMID: 20977286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Oct;1207:97-106. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05736.x.

Impact of innate inflammation in population studies.

Elkind MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA. mse13@columbia.edu

Innate inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis and progression
of atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, thrombosis, and stroke. Inflammatory
biomarkers related to innate inflammation, including acute phase proteins, may
predict first stroke. The utility of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and
other related markers may diminish among populations with established vascular
risk. Other biomarkers, including lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2, may
provide complementary information about prognosis after stroke or subclinical
vascular disease. The innate immune system originally evolved to provide
protection against bacterial infections. Moreover, infections may also contribute
to stroke risk. Summary measures representing multiple chronic infections have
been associated with risk of stroke and atherosclerosis. Acute infections,
particularly respiratory infections, have also been found to serve as
precipitants of stroke in recent epidemiological studies. These findings could
have clinical implications. Further studies are needed to determine the role of
innate inflammation and infection in stroke pathogenesis and prevention.

© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 20955432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Oct;1207:11-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05733.x.

Platelet-leukocyte interactions link inflammatory and thromboembolic events in
ischemic stroke.

Franks ZG(1), Campbell RA, Weyrich AS, Rondina MT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Stroke is a common and often fatal event, and, in survivors, it is accompanied by
a high risk of recurrence. Ischemic stroke is associated with abnormal platelet
activity and thrombus formation. In addition to their roles in the development of
acute thrombi, platelets serve as a bridge for leukocytes within the vasculature.
Myeloid leukocytes are critical mediators of atherosclerosis and
atherothrombosis. Interactions between platelets and leukocytes foster an
inflammatory and thrombotic milieu that influences lesion progression,
facilitates plaque rupture, and triggers thrombus formation and embolization.
Accordingly, antiplatelet agents, including aspirin, dipyridamole, and
clopidogrel, are recommended therapies for most patients with a history of
stroke. In addition to mitigating thrombosis, antiplatelet drugs have direct and 
indirect effects on inflammation, which may translate to enhanced clinical
efficacy.

© 2010 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3245960
PMID: 20955420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Imaging Med. 2010 Feb 1;2(1):63-75.

MRI in the early identification and classification of high-risk atherosclerotic
carotid plaques.

Hatsukami TS(1), Yuan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vascular Imaging Lab, University of Washington, 815
Mercer Street, Box 358050, Seattle, WA 98109, USA, Tel.: +1 206 543 3061, ,
tomhat@u.washington.edu.

Stroke is a leading cause of mortality and long-term morbidity. As a means for
stroke prevention, an estimated 99,000 carotid endarterectomy procedures were
performed in the USA in 2006. Traditionally, the degree of luminal stenosis has
been used as a marker of the stage of atherosclerosis and as an indication for
surgical intervention. However, prospective clinical trials have shown that the
majority of patients with a history of recent transient ischemic attack or stroke
have mild-to-moderate carotid stenosis. Using stenosis criteria, many of these
symptomatic individuals would be considered to have early-stage carotid
atherosclerosis. It is evident that improved criteria are needed for identifying 
the high-risk carotid plaque across a range of stenoses. Histological studies
have led to the hypothesis that plaques with larger lipid-rich necrotic cores,
thin fibrous cap rupture, intraplaque hemorrhage, plaque neovasculature and
vessel wall inflammation are characteristics of the high-risk, 'vulnerable
plaque'. Despite the widespread consensus on the importance of these plaque
features, testing the vulnerable plaque hypothesis in prospective clinical
studies has been hindered by the lack of reliable imaging tools for in vivo
plaque characterization. MRI has been shown to accurately identify key carotid
plaque features, including the fibrous cap, lipid-rich necrotic core, intraplaque
hemorrhage, neovasculature and vascular wall inflammation. Thus, MRI is a
histologically validated technique that will permit prospective testing of the
vulnerable plaque hypothesis. This article will provide a summary of the
histological validation of carotid MRI, and highlight its application in
prospective clinical studies aimed at early identification of the high-risk
atherosclerotic carotid plaque.

PMCID: PMC2953811
PMID: 20953294  [PubMed]


248. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2011 Feb;13(1):43-8. doi: 10.1007/s11886-010-0150-5.

FDG PET imaging and cardiovascular inflammation.

Hiari N(1), Rudd JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, England, UK.

The underlying pathologic mechanism of most acute coronary syndromes is
atherosclerotic plaque rupture. One cause of rupture is plaque inflammation,
leading to fibrous cap destabilization. Several imaging techniques, including
x-ray coronary angiography and multislice CT, can be used for the detection of
coronary atherosclerosis. However, these anatomical methods cannot measure
arterial inflammation. Positron emission tomography imaging of atherosclerosis
using the metabolic marker fluorodeoxyglucose allows quantification of arterial
inflammation across multiple vessels. This review discusses the rationale,
utility, potential future applications, and limitations of this emerging
biomarker of cardiovascular risk.

PMID: 20949379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 11;5(10):e13254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013254.

In vivo mapping of vascular inflammation using multimodal imaging.

Jarrett BR(1), Correa C, Ma KL, Louie AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Plaque vulnerability to rupture has emerged as a critical correlate
to risk of adverse coronary events but there is as yet no clinical method to
assess plaque stability in vivo. In the search to identify biomarkers of
vulnerable plaques an association has been found between macrophages and plaque
stability--the density and pattern of macrophage localization in lesions is
indicative of probability to rupture. In very unstable plaques, macrophages are
found in high densities and concentrated in the plaque shoulders. Therefore, the 
ability to map macrophages in plaques could allow noninvasive assessment of
plaque stability. We use a multimodality imaging approach to noninvasively map
the distribution of macrophages in vivo. The use of multiple modalities allows us
to combine the complementary strengths of each modality to better visualize
features of interest. Our combined use of Positron Emission Tomography and
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (PET/MRI) allows high sensitivity PET screening to
identify putative lesions in a whole body view, and high resolution MRI for
detailed mapping of biomarker expression in the lesions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Macromolecular and nanoparticle contrast agents
targeted to macrophages were developed and tested in three different mouse and
rat models of atherosclerosis in which inflamed vascular plaques form
spontaneously and/or are induced by injury. For multimodal detection, the probes 
were designed to contain gadolinium (T1 MRI) or iron oxide (T2 MRI), and Cu-64
(PET). PET imaging was utilized to identify regions of macrophage accumulation;
these regions were further probed by MRI to visualize macrophage distribution at 
high resolution. In both PET and MR images the probes enhanced contrast at sites 
of vascular inflammation, but not in normal vessel walls. MRI was able to
identify discrete sites of inflammation that were blurred together at the low
resolution of PET. Macrophage content in the lesions was confirmed by histology.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The multimodal imaging approach allowed
high-sensitivity and high-resolution mapping of biomarker distribution and may
lead to a clinical method to predict plaque probability to rupture.

PMCID: PMC2952595
PMID: 20949008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Stroke. 2010 Oct;41(10 Suppl):S3-8. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.594945.

Inflammatory mechanisms of stroke.

Elkind MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Epidemiology, Columbia University and New
York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA. mse13@columbia.edu

Basic and clinical research provides evidence that inflammatory mechanisms play a
central role in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis, plaque
rupture, thrombosis, and stroke. Inflammatory biomarkers such as high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein have been identified as predictors of first stroke and
prognosis after stroke. The value of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and
other markers may depend on the characteristics of the study population; their
utility may be less among populations with high vascular risk. A recent
randomized, clinical trial suggests that the use of rosuvastatin therapy in
otherwise healthy patients with high-sensitivity C-reactive protein >2 mg/dL can 
reduce the risk of a first stroke by 50%. The prognostic role of high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein among patients after stroke, however, is less clear, and other
biomarkers, including lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2), may provide
complementary information about the risk of stroke recurrence. Infections,
moreover, may contribute to inflammation and stroke risk. Although no single
infectious organism is likely to be identified as the direct cause of
atherosclerosis, summary measures of multiple chronic infectious exposures, or
"infectious burden," have been associated with the risk of stroke and
atherosclerosis affecting the carotid arteries. Acute infections have also been
found to serve as stroke triggers in epidemiologic studies. Recommendations to
vaccinate patients with cardiovascular disease against influenza represent the
first specific anti-infective strategy to be used in vascular prophylaxis.
Further studies are needed to determine the role of treatment of inflammation and
infection in stroke prevention.

PMCID: PMC2963080
PMID: 20876499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Z Rheumatol. 2010 Oct;69(8):680-4, 686-8. doi: 10.1007/s00393-009-0585-5.

[Inflammation-related cardiovascular morbidity : Pathophysiology and therapy].

[Article in German]

Fischer-Betz R(1), Halle M, Schneider M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumazentrum Rhein-Ruhr, Klinik für Endokrinologie, Diabetologie und
Rheumatologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Deutschland.
rebecca.fischer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are associated
with increased mortality, largely as a consequence of cardiovascular (CV)
disease. Studies found relative risk ratios of 2 for myocardial infarction in RA 
and up to 7 for myocardial infarction in SLE patients.Beyond the traditional CV
risk factors, chronic systemic inflammation has been shown to be a crucial factor
in atherosclerosis development and progression from endothelial dysfunction to
plaque rupture and thrombosis. Numerous studies have shown that atherosclerosis
is not a passive process characterized by accumulation of lipids in the vessel
walls, but rather represents active inflammation of the vasculature. Inflammatory
cells such as macrophages, monocytes and T cells play an important role in the
development of both RA and atherosclerosis.According to the recently published
EULAR recommendations for CV risk screening and management in patients with
inflammatory arthritis, annual CV risk assessment is recommended for all patients
with RA. Any CV risk factors identified should be optimally managed. In addition 
to appropriate CV risk management, aggressive suppression of the inflammatory
process is recommended to further lower CV risk.

PMID: 20862480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2010 May;11(5):367-76.

[Vulnerable plaque imaging: is it time for its application in clinical
practice?].

[Article in Italian]

Prati F(1), Zimarino M.

Author information: 
(1)Emodinamica e Cardiologia Interventistica, Ospedale San Giovanni, Roma.
fprati@hsangiovanni.roma.it

Atherosclerosis is a slowly progressive degenerative disease occasionally
characterized by a sudden shift in its natural history with a rupture of the
atherosclerotic plaque and consequent acute thrombosis and clinical events. In
recent years, biological and morphological factors responsible for the
instability of coronary plaques have been identified. According to the most
frequent pathophysiological sequence the fibrous cap that separates the lipid
core of the atherosclerotic plaque from the circulation, ruptures thus exposing
the highly thrombogenic biochemical elements and resulting in acute thrombosis
and possible vessel occlusion. In this scenario, plaque morphology plays a
crucial role along with systemic responses, such as activation of inflammation
and coagulation cascade, in the definition of the patients at risk of acute
myocardial infarction. Recent advances in intracoronary imaging techniques
capable of defining the morphological characteristics of vulnerable plaques with 
high resolution, have given us the reasonable expectation that, in the immediate 
future, critical information on the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and the
direct causes of myocardial infarction can be obtained. It is conceivable that in
the next few years these new high-resolution imaging techniques will be able to
identify the crucial characteristics that define a vulnerable plaque that is
likely to rupture. A scoring system designed to assess the specific risk of
instability for any given atherosclerotic plaque could be generated with the
purpose of identifying prospectively acute coronary events. In this perspective, 
optical coherence tomography is certainly the most promising imaging technique.
Thus, the association of specific morphological information with systemic markers
of vulnerability may allow in the near future to predict the true risk of acute
myocardial infarction for each individual patient.

PMID: 20860156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Invest Radiol. 2010 Nov;45(11):702-7. doi: 10.1097/RLI.0b013e3181f16e5a.

Assessment of age modulated vascular inflammation in ApoE-/- mice by
USPIO-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging.

Sigovan M(1), Bessaad A, Alsaid H, Lancelot E, Corot C, Neyran B, Provost N, Majd
Z, Breisse M, Canet-Soulas E.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lyon 1, CREATIS-LRMN, UMR CNRS 5220, U630 INSERM, Lyon, France.

OBJECTIVE: Inflammation within atherosclerotic lesions increases the risk for
plaque rupture and thrombosis. A functional approach to plaque analysis is the
intravenous administration of ultrasmall superparamagnetic particles of iron
oxide (USPIO) that enables visualization of macrophages residing in the plaques. 
In this study, we sought to characterize the age-related inflammatory status
associated with atherosclerosis lesion progression in ApoE mice using
USPIO-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 24 ApoE mice were divided in 4 groups (N = 6)
and were given a high cholesterol diet from 6 weeks of age to the end of the
protocol. One group per MR time point was investigated at 10, 16, 24, and 34
weeks of age. Each MR examination was performed on a 4.7 T scanner and consisted 
of baseline and 48 hours post-USPIO administration imaging sessions. P904, a
USPIO contrast agent (Guerbet, Paris, France) with a potential for plaque
macrophage targeting, was used.Vessel wall area measurements were performed on
high resolution spin echo transverse images. Multi-echo gradient-echo images
acquired with the same geometry were used to calculate T2* maps of the vessel
wall using a pixel-by-pixel monoexponential fit. A one-way analysis of variance
was performed to characterize the temporal variation of vessel wall area,
susceptibility artifact area, baseline, and post-USPIO T2* values. MR
measurements were correlated with the histologic findings.
RESULTS: A significant increase was found in the aortic wall area from 1.4 ± 0.2 
at 10 weeks to 2.0 ± 0.3 mm at 34 weeks of age (P < 0.05). Concerning the
post-USPIO MRI, signal loss regions, with patterns spanning from focal to the
complete disappearance of the vessel wall, were observed on all postcontrast
images. A significant increase in the size of the susceptibility artifact was
observed from 0.5 ± 0.2 to 2.4 ± 1.0 at 24 weeks (P < 0.05) and to 2.0 ± 0.9 mm
at 34 weeks (P < 0.05).The T2* values calculated on the 48 hours post-USPIO
images were shorter compared with baseline. The decrease was 34% ± 16% at 10
weeks, 57% ± 11% at 16 weeks, 57% ± 16% at 24 weeks, and 48% ± 13% at 34
weeks.The Pearson's correlation test between measurement of aortic wall area
performed on both MR images and histologic analysis showed a statistically
significant correlation (r = 0.695 and P < 0.05). A correlation was also obtained
between the signal loss area and the macrophages covered area (r = 0.68 and P <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the feasibility of USPIO-enhanced MRI in
assessing the inflammatory status related to the temporal progression of the
atherosclerosis plaque in ApoE transgenic mice model of atherosclerosis. In our
experimental conditions, the vascular inflammation peak, for the ApoE mice
feeding high-fat/high-cholesterol diet is measured between 16 and 24 weeks of
age.

PMID: 20829703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Thromb Res. 2010 Nov;126(5):386-92. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2010.07.022. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

Chronic unpredictable stress accelerates atherosclerosis through promoting
inflammation in apolipoprotein E knockout mice.

Zhang T(1), Chen Y, Liu H, Zhou Z, Zhai Y, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) has been suggested to accelerate
atherosclerosis. However, the underlying mechanism of this adverse effect is not 
fully understood. Since chronic stress can promote or even initiate inflammation 
response, which is thought to be a major contributor to atherogenesis, we
postulated that stress-induced inflammatory response might be one important
reason for CUS-promoted atherosclerotic disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used the CUS treated apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient 
mice, which have been shown to spontaneously develop atherosclerosis with
features similar to those seen in humans, as an animal model. Haematoxylin and
eosin staining and immunohistostaining were used to analyze the plaque formation 
and composition.
RESULTS: Histological analysis clearly demonstrated that CUS treatment promoted
the development of atherosclerotic lesions, such as triggering plaque rupture,
increasing plaque size and plaque-to-surface ratio, and also led to profound
changes in plaque composition, as evidenced by increased macrophage and T cell
infiltration and decreased smooth muscle cell mass, all reflecting an unstable
plaque phenotype. Moreover, adhesion molecular vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 
(VCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), acute phase reactant
C-reactive protein (CRP), and proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) were 
significantly enhanced in CUS treated ApoE(-/-) mice compared with untreated
control animals (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The involvement of CUS in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is at
least partially attributable to its acceleration of inflammation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;42(11):1762-6. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.07.012. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Platelets: pleiotropic roles in atherogenesis and atherothrombosis.

Linden MD(1), Jackson DE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC, Australia.
matthew.linden@rmit.edu.au

Platelets are small, anucleate blood elements of critical importance in
cardiovascular disease. The ability of platelets to activate and aggregate to
form blood clots in response to endothelial injury, such as plaque rupture, is
well established. These cells are therefore important contributors to ischaemia
in atherothrombosis, and antiplatelet therapy is effective for this reason.
However, growing evidence suggests that platelets are also important mediators of
inflammation and play a central role in atherogenesis itself. Interactions
between activated platelets, leukocytes and endothelial cells trigger autocrine
and paracrine activation signals, resulting in leukocyte recruitment at and into 
the vascular wall. Direct physical interaction may contribute also, through
platelet adhesion molecules assisting localization of monocytes to the site of
atherogenesis and platelet granule release contributing to the chronic
inflammatory milieu which leads to foam cell development and accelerated
atherogenesis. Recent studies have shown that antiplatelet therapy in animal
models of accelerated atherogenesis can lead to decreased plaque size and improve
plaque stability. This review examines the complexity of platelet function and
the nature of interactions between activated platelets, leukocytes and
endothelial cells. We focus on the growing body of evidence that platelets play a
critical role in atherogenesis and contribute to progression of atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20673808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Magn Reson Med. 2010 Aug;64(2):567-73. doi: 10.1002/mrm.22369.

Localized measurement of atherosclerotic plaque inflammatory burden with dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI.

Chen H(1), Cai J, Zhao X, Underhill H, Ota H, Oikawa M, Dong L, Yuan C, Kerwin
WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Inflammation plays an important role in progression and rupture of
atherosclerotic plaque. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI has been proposed as a tool
to evaluate inflammation in vivo by measuring the transfer constant and partial
plasma volume, which are influenced by inflammation. This study sought to
demonstrate the ability of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to provide localized
measurements of transfer constant and partial plasma volume within plaque regions
of different compositions. In order to do that, a highly automatic procedure for 
localized measurement of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI parameters was developed. 
In 47 subjects, the average transfer constant and partial plasma volume were
highest in loose matrix and fibrous tissue and substantially lower in intraplaque
hemorrhage, lipid rich/necrotic core, and calcification. In addition, except for 
hemorrhage and calcification, statistically significant differences of transfer
constant and partial plasma volume were observed for any pair of these
components. This suggests that transfer constant and partial plasma volume could 
be helpful to differentiate different plaque components and that dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI has the potential to assess inflammatory burden in specific
regions.

PMID: 20665799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2010 Aug;4(4):241-8. doi: 10.1177/1753944710375820. Epub
2010 Jul 26.

Darapladib: an emerging therapy for atherosclerosis.

Corson MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Harborview Medical Center, Room 2EH-64, 325 9th Avenue,
Seattle, WA 98104, USA. mcorson@u.washington.edu

Despite a reduction in cardiovascular risk conferred by therapies that modify
circulating lipids, a need remains for novel treatments to further decrease the
occurrence of complications of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases.
Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase-A(2) is an important regulator of lipid
metabolism and inflammation that circulates with lipoprotein particles and is
carried into the arterial wall with low-density lipoprotein particles during the 
progression of atherosclerosis. Within the vessel wall, lipoprotein-associated
phospholipase-A(2) releases small molecules that stimulate macrophage recruitment
and evolution to foam cells, leading to plaque vulnerability. Epidemiologic
studies demonstrate that elevated circulating levels of lipoprotein-associated
phospholipase-A(2) predict an increased risk of myocardial infarction and stroke,
whereas histologic examination of diseased human coronary arteries reveals
intense presence of the enzyme in atherosclerotic plaques that are prone to
rupture. These considerations suggest lipoprotein-associated phospholipase-A(2)
as a promising therapeutic target, and a specific inhibitor, darapladib, has been
under development for this application. This review summarizes the completed
preclinical and early phase clinical studies that underlie two recently commenced
phase III clinical trials that will investigate the efficacy and safety of
darapladib in nearly 13,000 individuals with coronary heart disease. When
completed, these trials should provide important insights into the utility of
darapladib to reduce myocardial infarction, stroke and cardiovascular death.

PMID: 20660537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Kardiologiia. 2010;50(6):88-91.

[Contemporary concepts of the role of inflammation in atherosclerosis].

[Article in Russian]

Alekperov ÉZ, Nadzhafov RN.

We present in this article main theories of development of atherosclerosis and
modern views of the role of inflammation in atherogenesis. We have conducted a
review of studies of the role of endothelial local factors such as accumulation
of smooth muscle cells, T and B lymphocytes, macrophages, matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP), high sensitivity C reactive protein (CRP). It has been
shown that low oxidative stress modulates expression of endothelial gene which
induces atherogenic factor formatting early atherosclerotic plaque (FP). CRP and 
oxidized low density lipoproteins (OxLDL) are directly linked with oxidative
damage of arteries in ischemic heart disease. Monocytes activated in areas of
inflammation by monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP) 1 and MMP 1 play pivotal
role in AP rupture. CRP and OxLDL augment synthesis of MMP, tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF alpha) and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM CSF). 
Moreover addition of exogenous MCP 1 and prostaglandin E2 elevates synthesis of
MMP 1, TNF alpha, and GM CSF by monocytes. Apoptosis of smooth muscle cells of AP
fibrous cap combined with destruction of extracellular matrix proteins by MMP 1
eventually leads to AP rupture.

PMID: 20659035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2010 Feb;20(2):65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2010.04.002.

Rupture of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques: microRNAs conducting the
orchestra?

Haver VG(1), Slart RH, Zeebregts CJ, Peppelenbosch MP, Tio RA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Imaging Group Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are tiny, endogenous nucleotides that bind to mRNA and induce 
translation repression within metazoan cells. Since their discovery in 1993 in
Caenorhabditis elegans and the demonstration of miRNAs in Homo sapiens in 2000,
research has been fruitful in deciphering the role of these nucleotides in
development, tissue homeostasis, and pathologic processes. In humans, around 700 
human miRNA nucleotides have been verified, which interfere with 30% of all
genes. Recently, the role of miRNA in cardiovascular research gained attention
and the involvement of miRNAs in several cardiovascular diseases has been
identified. In this review, we focus on the role of miRNAs in atherosclerosis and
in particular on the potential role of miRNAs in the development of vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaques. The role of miRNA in the main characteristics of these
plaques, inflammation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis will be discussed. Finally,
the future perspectives and miRNA-based diagnostic and therapeutic potentials
will be highlighted.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20656218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. (99m)Tc-Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1.

Hartung D, Petrov A, Cheng KT, Narula J.
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2008 Feb 02.

Chemotactic cytokines, such as monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (chemotactic
protein-1; MCP-1), play a pivotal role in the inflammatory process associated
with the development and progression of atherosclerosis (1, 2). MCP-1, a low
molecular weight monomeric peptide (9–15 kDa), is initially upregulated at the
site of vessel wall injury by vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) and endothelial 
cells (3). MCP-1, in interaction with several cytokines and cell adhesion
molecules, mediates the transendothelial migration of monocytes to the
subendothelial layer via cysteine-cysteine motif chemokine receptor-2 (CCR-2)
receptor (4-7). As a response to the chemotactic signal, monocytes upregulate the
number of CCR-2 receptors on their cell surface (8). The recruited monocytes then
express MCP-1 by themselves, which accelerates the further influx of mononuclear 
cells. Once resident within the neointima, the monocytes differentiate to
macrophages, express matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), transform to foam cells by
digesting oxidized low-density lipoproteins via expression of scavenger
receptors, and form a necrotic core by undergoing apoptosis or necrosis (1). The 
MMPs expressed by macrophages and foam cells induce dissolution of SMCs and
collagen, which causes the plaque cap to thin and makes the cap susceptible to
rupture (9, 10). Because the extent of macrophage inflammation in atherosclerotic
plaque is positively related to plaque instability, and because the receptor for 
MCP-1 is only expressed by infiltrating monocytes, the detection of MCP-1
receptors should allow monitoring of the extent of inflammation in
atherosclerotic plaque. The use of radiolabeled MCP-1 for non-invasive imaging of
the CCR-2 receptor density in atherosclerotic plaque might provide to be a useful
clinical tool for the detection of plaques vulnerable to rupture. Ohtsuki et al. 
(11) demonstrated the feasibility of using (125)I-MCP-1 to identify lesional
monocytes and macrophages in experimental atherosclerosis with autoradiography.
Blankenberg et al. (12) successfully labeled recombinant human MCP-1 with (99m)Tc
using the nicotinic acid analog hydrazinonicotinamide (HYNIC) as the chelator.
The study demonstrated that (99m)Tc-MCP-1 could detect abnormally increased
numbers of perivascular mononuclear cells in native and grafted hearts in
prediabetic rats. Kown et al. (13) reported that (99m)Tc-MCP-1 could be used to
assess graft coronary artery disease in rats. Hartung et al. (14) evaluated
(99m)Tc-MCP-1 for detection of inflammation in rabbits with induced
atherosclerotic lesions. The study concluded that non-invasive detection of
inflammation in experimental atherosclerotic lesions was feasible using
(99m)Tc-MCP-1.

PMID: 20641934  [PubMed]


261. (64)Cu-DTPA-CLIO-VT680.

Zhang H.
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2008 Feb 08.

Macrophages are key cellular mediators of inflammation in atheroma and
participate in all phases of atherogenesis (1, 2). The atheroma lesion is
initialized by recruiting monocytes in inflamed intima. Monocytes mature into
macrophages under the in situ stimulation of overexpressed macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. As cholesteryl esters gradually accumulate in
cytoplasm, macrophages are converted into foam cells at the early stage of
atheroma. The accumulation of foam cells leads to the formation of fatty streaks 
and the deposition of fibrous tissues, indicating the progression of atheroma
into an intermediate stage. Fibrous caps are formed on the surface of a
lipid-rich core and result in vulnerable plaque as the smooth muscle cells
synthesize bulk extracellular matrix. The rupture of plaque and the calcification
of vessel walls progressively occlude the lumen. All of these developmental
stages are produced in apolipoprotein E–deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice (3), a
transgenic animal model with targeted deletion of the apoE gene. As a ligand,
apoE binds to the receptors that are responsible for clearing chylomicrons and
very low density lipoprotein remnants (4). A deficiency in apoE reduces diet
cholesterol absorption and leads to a substantial increase in plasma cholesterol 
levels. ApoE(-/-) mice are used in the study of spontaneous hypercholesterolemia 
and the subsequent development of atherosclerotic lesions (4, 5). The
histopathological progression found in apoE(-/-) mice is very similar to that
found in humans (3). Because the arch shape and the proximity to three major
arteries (the right and left common carotid arteries and the left subclavian
arteries), atherosclerosis primarily occurs at the aortic arch in apoE(-/-) mice 
(3). Dextran-coated paramagnetic nanoparticles, such as ultra-small
superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (USPIO), are known to accumulate in the
macrophages located in inflamed lesions and carotid artery plaques after
intravenous administration (6). The active internalization mechanism may be
associated with dextran receptor–mediated endocytosis (1). Intracellular
dextranase cleaves the dextran coating and leaves the iron oxide to be
solubilized into iron ions followed by progressive incorporation into the
hemoglobin pool (6). Because of long circulation times, excellent
biocompatibility, and high relaxivity, USPIO are widely used to enhance magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) contrast for imaging lesional macrophages in stroke,
multiple sclerosis, atherosclerotic diseases, spinal cord injury, and brain
tumors (6). Monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticles (MION) are a special type of
USPIO that contain an icosahedral core of superparamagnetic crystalline Fe3O4
(magnetite) with a diameter of ~5 nm (7). Using epichlorohydrin to cross-link the
dextran coating and amine groups to functionalize the surface, MION can be
converted into an aminated platform (cross-linked iron oxide (CLIO)-NH2) that
allows attachment of various imaging probes (8). CLIO-NH2 carrying fluorescent
probes has demonstrated preferential uptake by lesional macrophages, concomitant 
with a much lower uptake by endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells (1).
(64)Cu-Labeled diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA)-CLIO-Vivotag 680
(VT680) is a (64)Cu-labeled triple reporter nanoparticle ((64)Cu-TNP) used in
MRI, positron-emission tomography (PET), and optical fluorescence imaging (9).
(64)Cu-TNP consists of three probe types. A CLIO-NH2 forms the core of the
nanoparticle, generates a T2-shortening effect in MRI, and is recognizable by
macrophages. Numerous complexes of (64)Cu-DTPA are attached to the surface of
CLIO-NH2 for PET detection. (64)Cu is a positron-emitting radionuclide with an
intermediate half-life (12.7 h) that decays by positron (β(+)) with a branching
factor of 17.4% and a maximum β(+) energy of 0.653 MeV (10). (64)Cu has been used
as a radiotracer in PET imaging and a radiotherapy agent in cancer treatment.
Five molecules of VT680, an amine-reactive N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester of a 
(benzyl)-indolium–derived far-red fluorescent probe that remains internalized in 
cells for days without interfering with cell functions, are attached to CLIO-NH2 
for fluorescence imaging (11). Its excitation/emission peak is located at 670 ± 5
nm/688 ± 5 nm. The internalization mechanism includes diffusion into cells within
minutes and covalent binding to cellular components (11). This
macrophage-targeted PET/MRI/optical agent allows complementary information to be 
obtained by multimodal imaging (9). The PET tracer is detected at 10(-6)–10(-8) M
(10), providing a sensitivity to detection that is at least one order of
magnitude higher than the 10(-5) M in MRI (9). The spatial resolution of MRI
permits mapping of the atherosclerotic vascular territories. The cell-specified
optical probes explore the fate of the imaging probe at cellular levels (9, 11).

PMID: 20641719  [PubMed]


262. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Sep;212(1):34-5. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.06.018. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) from highly concentrated n-3 fatty acid ethyl esters 
is incorporated into advanced atherosclerotic plaques and higher plaque EPA is
associated with decreased plaque inflammation and increased stability.

Zampelas A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural University of Athens, Department of Food Science and Technology, 
Unit of Human Nutrition, Lera Odos 75, 11855 Athens, Greece. azampelas@aua.gr

Comment on
    Atherosclerosis. 2010 Sep;212(1):252-9.

PMID: 20638067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Apoptosis. 2010 Sep;15(9):1124-36. doi: 10.1007/s10495-010-0516-6.

Mechanisms of failed apoptotic cell clearance by phagocyte subsets in
cardiovascular disease.

Thorp EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
ebt2103@columbia.edu

Recent evidence in humans indicate that defective phagocytic clearance of dying
cells is linked to progression of advanced atherosclerotic lesions, the precursor
to atherothrombosis, ischemic heart disease, and leading cause of death in the
industrialized world. During atherogenesis, apoptotic cell turnover in the
vascular wall is counterbalanced by neighboring phagocytes with high clearance
efficiency, thereby limiting cellularity and maintaining lesion integrity.
However, as lesions mature, phagocytic removal of apoptotic cells (efferocytosis)
becomes defective, leading to secondary necrosis, expansion of plaque necrotic
cores, and susceptibility to rupture. Recent genetic causation studies in
experimental rodents have implicated key molecular regulators of efferocytosis in
atherosclerotic progression. These include MER tyrosine kinase (MERTK), milk fat 
globule-EGF factor 8 (MFGE8), and complement C1q. At the cellular level,
atheromata are infiltrated by a heterogenous population of professional
phagocytes, comprised of monocytes, differentiated macrophages, and CD11c(+)
dendritic-like cells. Each cell type is characterized by disparate clearance
efficiencies and varying activities of key phagocytic signaling molecules. It is 
in this context that we outline a working model whereby plaque necrosis and
destabilization is jointly promoted by (1) direct inhibition of core phagocytic
signaling pathways and (2) expansion of phagocyte subsets with poor clearance
capacity. Towards identifying targets for promoting efficient apoptotic cell
clearance and resolving inflammation in atherosclerosis and during ischemic heart
disease and post myocardial infarction, this review will discuss potential in
vivo suppressors of efferocytosis at each stage of clearance and how these
putative interventional targets may differentially affect uptake at the level of 
vascular phagocyte subsets.

PMCID: PMC3744319
PMID: 20552278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(23):2567-71.

Cyclooxygenase and atherosclerosis: a smoking area.

Pistoia F(1), Cipollone F, Ferri C, Sarà M, Sudano I, Desideri GB.

Author information: 
(1)Casa di Cura San Raffaele, via Gaetano di Biasio 1, 03043 Cassino (FR),
Italia. pistoiafrancesca@hotmail.com

Chronic smoking is associated with functional and structural vascular changes
underlying inflammatory processes responsible for plaque formation and rupture.
Cyclooxygenase (COX) is the key enzyme linking smoking action to inflammatory
damages: it is responsible for the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostanoids,
and lipid mediators involved in most of pathological processes. Two COX
isoenzymes have been characterized, COX-1 and COX-2, that differ in terms of
regulatory mechanisms of expression, tissue distribution, substrate specificity, 
and preferential coupling to upstream and downstream enzymes. The aim of this
review is to highlight the pathogenetic role of chronic smoking in vasomotor
dysfunction, inflammation, and modification of lipids underlying the initiation
and the progression of atherosclerosis and to remark the hypothesis that plaque
composition rather than plaque size is the real determinant of the plaque
evolution toward rupture and the major responsible for acute ischemic syndromes. 
The concomitantly higher expression of EP4, COX-2, mPGES-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9 in
unstable plaques is focused and the role of PGE(2) as pathophysiological link
between smoking, COX-2 and MMP activity is stressed. Indeed, the intracellular
pathways regulating COX-2 and the mechanisms suggested to clarify the role of
COX-2 and downstream synthases in atherothrombosis are summarized.

PMID: 20550500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biomark Med. 2010 Jun;4(3):361-73. doi: 10.2217/bmm.10.57.

Biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress in atherosclerosis.

Uno K(1), Nicholls SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart & Vascular Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Increasing evidence has highlighted the roles of oxidative stress and
inflammation in the promotion of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Recent
pathological studies have elucidated specific mediators that appear to link these
pathways to the progression and rupture of atherosclerotic plaque in the artery
wall. The ability to measure levels of these mediators in the systemic
circulation has provoked interest in their development as biomarkers for
potential use in risk assessment and in evaluation of the response to the use of 
preventive therapies. The discovery of these pathological mediators and their
potential translation to the clinical arena will be reviewed.

PMID: 20550470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Sep;212(1):252-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.05.022. Epub 2010 May 20.

Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) from highly concentrated n-3 fatty acid ethyl esters 
is incorporated into advanced atherosclerotic plaques and higher plaque EPA is
associated with decreased plaque inflammation and increased stability.

Cawood AL(1), Ding R, Napper FL, Young RH, Williams JA, Ward MJ, Gudmundsen O,
Vige R, Payne SP, Ye S, Shearman CP, Gallagher PJ, Grimble RF, Calder PC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2010 Sep;212(1):34-5.
    Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2010 Nov;12(6):357-8.

OBJECTIVE: To examine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) incorporation into
atherosclerotic plaques and the association with plaque inflammation and
stability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients awaiting carotid endarterectomy (n=121) were
randomised to consume control capsules or n-3 PUFA ethyl ester capsules until
surgery (median 21 days). The fatty acid compositions of plasma and carotid
plaque phospholipids, plaque features, and expression of inflammatory genes were 
determined. The proportion of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) was higher (P<0.0001)
in carotid plaque phospholipids in patients in the n-3 PUFA group. Plaques from
patients in the n-3 PUFA group had fewer foam cells (P=0.0390). There were no
other differences between plaques in the two groups with regard to histological
characteristics or morphology. Plaque stability was not different between the two
groups. However, the EPA content of plaque phospholipids was inversely associated
with plaque instability (P=0.0209), plaque inflammation (P=0.0108), the number of
T cells in the plaque (P=0.0097) and a summary score considering a range of
plaque features (P=0.0425). Plaques from patients who received n-3 PUFAs had
significantly lower levels of mRNA for matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-7
(P=0.0055), -9 (P=0.0048) and -12 (P=0.0044) and for interleukin-6 (P=0.0395) and
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (P=0.0142).
CONCLUSIONS: Atherosclerotic plaques readily incorporate EPA. A higher plaque EPA
content is associated with a reduced number of foam cells and T cells, less
inflammation and increased stability.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20542512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Jun 8;55(23):2527-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.12.061.

Imaging atherosclerotic plaque inflammation by fluorodeoxyglucose with positron
emission tomography: ready for prime time?

Rudd JH(1), Narula J, Strauss HW, Virmani R, Machac J, Klimas M, Tahara N, Fuster
V, Warburton EA, Fayad ZA, Tawakol AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
England. jhfr2@cam.ac.uk

Inflammation is a determinant of atherosclerotic plaque rupture, the event
leading to most myocardial infarctions and strokes. Although conventional imaging
techniques identify the site and severity of luminal stenosis, the inflammatory
status of the plaque is not addressed. Positron emission tomography imaging of
atherosclerosis using the metabolic marker fluorodeoxyglucose allows
quantification of arterial inflammation across multiple vessels. This review sets
out the background and current and potential future applications of this emerging
biomarker of cardiovascular risk, along with its limitations.

Copyright 2010 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1628-33. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.205740. Epub 2010 May 27.

Genetic regulation of endothelial inflammatory responses in baboons.

Rainwater DL(1), Shi Q, Mahaney MC, Hodara V, Vandeberg JL, Wang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San
Antonio, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic contributions to the expression of cell
surface adhesion molecules on endothelial cells (ECs) and to the release by ECs
of chemokines, which are responsible for local inflammation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Monocyte adhesion to ECs and transmigration across the
endothelial barrier are the key steps in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques
and the rupture of the existing plaques. Biopsy specimens were obtained from the 
femoral arteries of 131 pedigreed baboons (65 males and 66 females) aged
10.4+/-1.5 years (mean+/-SD); arterial ECs were harvested and cultured up to the 
second passage and then subjected to in vitro challenge with tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) alpha, 10 ng/mL, or vehicle for 4 hours. Endothelial surface
adhesion molecules were measured using flow cytometry, and chemokines released by
the ECs were measured by immunoassay. In response to TNF-alpha treatment,
interleukin 8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 released by ECs were
increased 3.4- and 26-fold, respectively (P<0.001). The expressions of
E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 were increased 12.2-, 41.4-, and 3.5-fold, respectively (P<0.001). The
quantitative levels of several traits were heritable after TNF-alpha stimulation:
h(2)=0.24 (P=0.02) for interleukin 8 and h(2)=0.28 (P=0.003) for E-selectin in
culture medium; h(2)=0.21 (P=0.03) for intercellular adhesion molecule-1; and
h(2)=0.37 (P<0.001) for vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 expression on EC
surfaces. Furthermore, significant heritability was observed for lysate protein
level, which is a measure of cell growth rate, with (h(2)=0.64, P<0.001) or
without (h(2)=0.51, P<0.001) TNF-alpha stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports on the heritability of adhesion molecules in ECs 
when activated by TNF-alpha. This finding suggests genetic regulation of key
arterial wall inflammatory processes that are responsible for the initiation of
atherosclerotic lesions and the plaque rupture of existing atheromas.

PMCID: PMC2908371
PMID: 20508207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Nucl Med. 2010 May;51(5):663-6. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.109.065698.

Matrix-metalloproteinases as imaging targets for inflammatory activity in
atherosclerotic plaques.

Schäfers M(1), Schober O, Hermann S.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute for Molecular Imaging-EIMI, Münster, Germany.
schafmi@uni-muenster.de

Cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction or stroke resulting from
atherosclerosis still account for the majority of deaths worldwide. New imaging
approaches focusing on the visualization of inflammation in the vessel wall may
emerge as tools for individualized risk assessment and prevention of events.
Enzymes such as matrix-metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in several steps in
plaque progression driving plaques into vulnerable, rupture-prone states.
Targeting of MMPs for imaging is therefore a promising strategy. The rationale,
potential, and current status of imaging MMPs in the clinical context of stroke
and myocardial infarction are reviewed here from a clinical viewpoint.

PMID: 20439506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Oct;212(2):377-82. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.03.035. Epub 2010 Apr 4.

An update on the relationships between rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis.

Ozbalkan Z(1), Efe C, Cesur M, Ertek S, Nasiroglu N, Berneis K, Rizzo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Ankara Numune Hospital, Turkey.
z.aslar@hotmail.com

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease. Cardiovascular events are
the most important cause of mortality and morbidity in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. Beyond the traditional cardiovascular risk factors, chronic systemic
inflammation has been shown to be a crucial factor in atherosclerosis development
and progression from endothelial dysfunction to plaque rupture and thrombosis.
Many studies have shown that atherosclerosis is not a passive event like
accumulation of lipids in the vessel walls; by contrast, it represents an active 
inflammation of the vessels. Inflammatory cells such as macrophages, monocytes
and T cells play important roles in the development of both rheumatoid arthritis 
and atherosclerosis. In this article we analyse the relationships between
rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20430394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Aug;211(2):456-60. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.03.005. Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Differences in carotid plaque content of macrophages, T cells and MMP-9 between
patients with embolic and hemodynamic cerebral ischemia due to symptomatic
carotid stenosis.

Kunte H(1), Kunte G, Busch MA, Weichert W, Rückert RI, Harms L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1,
10117 Berlin, Germany. hagen.kunte@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Cerebral ischemia in patients with carotid artery atherosclerosis is 
most often caused by thromboembolism, while hemodynamic stroke mechanism is rare.
Differences in plaque inflammation according to stroke mechanism are an
understudied issue. The purpose of this pilot study was to compare carotid plaque
inflammation in patients with thromboembolic and hemodynamic cerebral ischemia.
METHODS: We included 6 patients with hemodynamic and 27 with embolic cerebral
ischemia who had carotid endarterectomy (CEA). We compared plaque morphology
markers (macrophages, T cells, MMP-9, plaque rupture, surface thrombus,
intraplaque hemorrhage, lipid core) between patients with hemodynamic and embolic
cerebral ischemia and assessed vascular events and deaths during the first year
post CEA.
RESULTS: Compared to patients with hemodynamic mechanism, those with embolic
mechanism showed a higher median (interquartile range) content of T cells/mm(2)
[49.66 (21.26-71.39) vs. 10.28 (7.05-13.87); P=0.0005] and higher median total
percentages of macrophage area [2.81% (1.69-4.09) vs. 0.99% (0.57-1.50); P=0.003]
and MMP-9 area [0.63% (0.42-1.01) vs. 0.25% (0.05-0.45); P=0.007]. Signs of
plaque instability such as plaque rupture, surface thrombus and intraplaque
hemorrhage showed a tendency to be more pronounced in patients with
thromboembolism. The incidences of vascular events and the survival rates in the 
first year after CEA were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Major differences in plaques related to stroke mechanism were found 
in patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis. However, further investigations
are necessary to validate our results. Identification of stroke mechanism may
improve risk stratification and could help to identify the most suitable
secondary stroke prevention strategy.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20427044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2010 Mar;12(2):140-4. doi: 10.1007/s11883-010-0095-6.

Lp-PLA(2) as a marker of cardiovascular diseases.

Bhatti S(1), Hakeem A, Cilingiroglu M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati, OH 45206, USA. sabha.bhatti@uc.edu

Inflammation lies at the base of endothelial dysfunction, eventually leading to
plaque formation. The degree of inflammation defines the "vulnerability" of
plaque to rupture. Numerous strategies have been adopted to identify and
eventually treat high-risk vulnerable plaque. Lipoprotein-associated
phospholipase A(2) (Lp-PLA(2)) has emerged as one such candidate marker of
inflammation that may play a direct role in the formation of rupture-prone
plaque. Epidemiologic studies have clearly demonstrated the prognostic ability of
increased Lp-PLA(2) levels and their association with increased risk of future
coronary and cerebrovascular events. Moreover, Lp-PLA(2) might have similar
predictive power for both incident coronary heart disease in initially healthy
individuals as well as for recurrent events in those with clinically manifest
atherosclerosis. The latest evidence has also suggested its incremental value for
risk determination over the well-established traditional risk factors and
biomarkers in patients with congestive heart failure. These data support an
integral role of Lp-PLA(2) activity in lipid peroxidation and cardiovascular risk
assessment. This review summarizes the current body of evidence supporting the
clinical utility of Lp-PLA(2) and its future applications in cardiovascular
medicine.

PMID: 20425250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2010 Jul;12(4):338-43. doi: 10.1007/s11886-010-0113-x.

What have we learned about plaque rupture in acute coronary syndromes?

Choi SY(1), Mintz GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ajou University Medical Center, San 5, Wondhondong, 
Youngtonggu, Suwon, 443-721, Republic of Korea.

The most common cause of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is rupture of an
atherosclerotic lesion containing a large necrotic core and a thin fibrous cap
followed by acute luminal thrombosis because the rupture of the thin fibrous cap 
allows contact of the platelets with the highly thrombogenic necrotic core.
Pathologic studies have suggested that the precursor of the ruptured plaque is
the so-called thin cap fibroatheroma (TCFA). Unfortunately, true natural history 
studies of TCFAs and their transition to ruptured plaques are rare. Most of the
data and concepts have been inferred from studies performed at a single point in 
time. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) studies have shown ruptured plaques in
approximately two thirds of ACS culprit lesions and occur in predictable
locations. The features that differentiate secondary, nonculprit plaque ruptures 
from those that cause ACS events appear to be superimposed thrombosis and lumen
compromise, either from the thrombus or from the underlying lesion. Secondary
plaque ruptures appear to heal with optimal medical therapy. In vivo definitions 
of TCFAs have been derived from pathology study to include positive remodeling, a
fibrous cap less than 100 microm (and perhaps <65 microm) at its minimum
thickness, macrophage infiltration especially in the thin fibrous cap, a large
lipid/necrotic core often containing hemorrhage and/or speckled or diffuse
calcification (not enough to increase plaque stability although the absence of
any calcium is also rare in rupture-prone plaques), and abundant intraplaque vasa
vasorum and/or hemorrhage. Early data from in vivo imaging have substantiated the
pathologic observations, but have also suggested that spontaneous stabilization
of TCFAs with medical therapy alone is possible.

PMID: 20425160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2010 Jan;32(2):121-8. doi: 10.3109/10641960903254414.

Anti-inflammatory properties of azelnidipine, a dihydropyridine-based calcium
channel blocker.

Komoda H(1), Inoue T, Node K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Renal Medicine, Saga University Faculty of
Medicine, Saga, Japan.

Accumulating evidence suggests that inflammation as well as oxidative stress play
essential roles in atherogenesis, progression of atherosclerosis, and plaque
instability and rupture. Recent studies on available anti-hypertensive agents
have focused on their anti-atherosclerotic effects over and above their blood
pressure lowering action. These studies have included investigations on several
types of calcium channel blockers, with several investigations indicating that a 
dihydropiridine-based calcium channel blocker, azelnidipine, developed in Japan, 
has unique anti-oxidative properties. An anti-inflammatory effect of azelnidipine
has, however, yet to be established and therefore we carried out a series of in
vivo and in vitro studies to investigate this possibility. This was achieved by
measuring inflammatory and oxidative stress markers in 16 high risk hypertensive 
patients administered 16mg/day of azelnidipine. After 4 weeks of treatment, serum
levels of hsCRP, IL-6, and IL-8 and urinary 8-OHdG were decreased significantly, 
despite blood pressure remaining unchanged. Cultures of human mononuclear
leukocytes collected from six healthy volunteers showed 100 nM of azelnidipine
caused significant inhibition of formyl-methyonyl leucyl phenylalanine
(fMLP)-induced production of IL-8. Taken together, these results suggest that
azelnidipine has anti-inflammatory effects independent of its anti-hypertensive
action. As leukocytes do not possess voltage-operated calcium channels, the
effect of azelnidipine in these cells appears to occur independently of an L-type
calcium channel antagonizing effect.

PMID: 20374186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2009 Apr;37 Suppl 4:1-6.

[Atherosclerosis and the role of inflammation].

[Article in Turkish]

Tokgözoğlu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe Universitesi Tip Fakültesi Kardiyoloji Anabilim Dali, Ankara,
Turkey. lalet@hacettepe.edu.tr

Inflammation plays an important role in the development of atherosclerotic
vascular disease which is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the
adult population. Various risk factors trigger an inflammatory response leading
to the initiation and development of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Several
adhesion molecules, cytokines, and growth factors secreted from the endothelium
aggravate inflammation and increase subendothelial lipid accumulation. With
continuing inflammation, plaque rupture occurs resulting in acute coronary
syndromes. Recently, the importance of the immune system and the mechanisms of
the inflammatory response have been elucidated. One of the markers of subclinical
inflammation in atherosclerosis is increased levels of high-sensitivity CRP.
Several clinical trials have shown that suppression of the inflammatory response 
can delay or decrease the atherosclerotic process. Among the approaches for a
healthier lifestyle, diets low in saturated fats, the Mediterranean diet, and
exercise have been shown to decrease the inflammatory response. Various
pharmacologic agents also have anti-inflammatory effects. Lipid-lowering
therapies, in particular statins have proved to have anti-inflammatory effects on
atheromatous plaques. Several clinical trials have shown that patients with an
increased inflammatory response benefit more from statins. Therapeutic approaches
targeting directly the inflammatory response and vaccination against
atherosclerosis are under investigation.

PMID: 19553755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2010 Jun;10(2):149-60.

A broad variety of antigens contribute to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis:
how to neutralize noxious reactions in the host.

Magrone T(1), Jirillo E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease characterized by lipid accumulation as
well as vascular injury due to a massive infiltration of immune cells in the
endothelial wall. Microbial and self- antigens are responsible for a persistent
activation of immune and non-immune cells, thus leading to a condition of
arterial chronic inflammation with plaque formation and rupture in complicated
cases. In particular, the effects of bacteria, viruses and their toxic products
as well as of glycated lipoproteins will be illustrated with special reference to
the main inflammatory pathways triggered by a persistent antigenic load in the
host. Taking into consideration this broad variety of antigens implicated in the 
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, therapeutic approaches such as antibiotics,
dietary intervention and immune therapies will be discussed.

PMID: 20350289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2010 Feb 25;56(1):59-82.

Omega-3 fatty acids, inflammation and angiogenesis: basic mechanisms behind the
cardioprotective effects of fish and fish oils.

Massaro M(1), Scoditti E, Carluccio MA, Campana MC, De Caterina R.

Author information: 
(1)C.N.R. Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, and Lecce, Italy.

Atherosclerosis is now widely accepted to be an inflammatory disease,
characterized by degenerative as well as proliferative changes and extracellular 
accumulation of lipid and cholesterol, in which an ongoing inflammatory reaction 
plays an important role both in initiation and progression/destabilization,
converting a chronic process into an acute disorder. Neovascularization has also 
been recognized as an important process for the progression/destabilization of
atherosclerotic plaques. In fact, vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques prone to
rupture are characterized by an enlarged necrotic core, containing an increased
number of vasa vasorum, apoptotic macrophages, and more frequent intraplaque
haemorrhage. Various functional roles have been assigned to intimal microvessels,
however the relationship between the process of angiogenesis and its causal
association with the progression and complications of atherosclerosis are still
challenging and controversial. In the past 30 years, the dietary intake of
omega-3 (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids--mainly derived from fish--has emerged 
as an important way to modify cardiovascular risk through beneficial effects on
all stages of atherosclerosis, including plaque angiogenesis. This review
specifically focuses on the modulating effects of n-3 fatty acids on molecular
events involved in early and late atherogenesis, including effects on endothelial
expression of adhesion molecules, as well as pro-inflammatory and pro-angiogenic 
enzymes. By accumulating in endothelial membrane phospholipids, omega-3 fatty
acids have been shown to decrease the transcriptional activation of several genes
through an attenuation of activation of the nuclear factor-kappaB system of
transcription factors. This occurs secondary to decreased generation of
intracellular reactive oxygen species. This series of investigations configures a
clear example of nutrigenomics--i.e., how nutrients may affect gene expression,
ultimately affecting a wide spectrum of human diseases.

PMID: 20196971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mediators Inflamm. 2009;2009:737282. doi: 10.1155/2009/737282. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Leukotrienes in atherosclerosis: new target insights and future therapy
perspectives.

Riccioni G(1), Zanasi A, Vitulano N, Mancini B, D'Orazio N.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit, San Camillo de Lellis Hospital, Manfredonia, Foggia, Italy.
griccioni@hotmail.com

Atherosclerosis represents an important chronic inflammatory process associated
with several pathophysiological reactions in the vascular wall. The arachidonic
acid, released by phospholipase A2, is an important substrate for the production 
of a group of lipid mediators known as leukotrienes, which induce proinflammatory
signaling through the activation of specific BLT and CysLT receptors. The
interaction of these substances in the vascular wall determines important
morphological alterations like the early lipid retention and the accumulation of 
foam cells, the development of intimal hyperplasia, and advanced atherosclerotic 
lesions, and it plays an important role in the rupture of atherosclerotic plaque.
Many studies regarding myocardial ischemia and reperfusion show that leukotriene 
signaling may be involved in the development of ischemic injury. For these,
reasons both leukotriene synthesis inhibitors and leukotriene receptor
antagonists have been suggested for inducing beneficial effects at different
stages of the atherosclerosis process and may represent a new therapeutic target 
in the treatment of atherosclerotic vessel diseases, in particular in acute
coronary syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2817543
PMID: 20150962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Postgrad Med. 2009 Oct-Dec;55(4):284-6. doi: 10.4103/0022-3859.58936.

Inhibiting extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer maybe beneficial for
diminishing the atherosclerotic plaque instability.

Xie S(1), Nie R, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Atherosclerotic plaque rupture and local thrombosis activation in the artery
cause acute serious incidents such as acute coronary syndrome and stroke. The
exact mechanism of plaque rupture remains unclear but excessive degradation of
the extracellular matrix scaffold by matrix-degrading metalloproteinases (MMPs)
has been implicated as one of the major molecular mechanisms in this process.
Convincing evidence is available to prove that extracellular matrix
metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) induces MMP expression and is involved in the
inflammatory responses in the artery wall. The inflammation and MMPs have been
shown to play a critical role for atherosclerotic lesion development and
progression. More recent data showed that increased EMMPRIN expression was
associated with vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions. Therefore, we speculate that 
EMMPRIN may be pivotal for atherosclerotic plaque instability, and hence
inhibition of EMMPRIN expression could be a promising approach for the prevention
or treatment of atheroma instability.

PMID: 20083879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2010 Feb;7(2):77-86. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2009.228. Epub 2010
Jan 12.

Monocytes in atherosclerosis: subsets and functions.

Woollard KJ(1), Geissmann F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Cellular Biology of Inflammation (CMCBI), Division of
Immunology, Infection and Inflammatory Diseases (DIIID), Guys Campus, London SE1 
1UL, UK. kevin.woollard@kcl.ac.uk

Chronic inflammation drives atherosclerosis, the leading cause of cardiovascular 
disease. Over the past two decades, data have emerged showing that immune cells
are involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques. The accumulation and
continued recruitment of leukocytes are associated with the development of
'vulnerable' plaques. These plaques are prone to rupture, leading to thrombosis, 
myocardial infarction or stroke, all of which are frequent causes of death.
Plaque macrophages account for the majority of leukocytes in plaques, and are
believed to differentiate from monocytes recruited from circulating blood.
However, monocytes represent a heterogenous circulating population of cells.
Experiments are needed to address whether monocyte recruitment to plaques and
effector functions, such as the formation of foam cells, the production of nitric
oxide and reactive oxygen species, and proteolysis are critical for the
development and rupture of plaques, and thus for the pathophysiology of
atherosclerosis, as well as elucidate the precise mechanisms involved.

PMCID: PMC2813241
PMID: 20065951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Circ J. 2010 Feb;74(2):213-20. Epub 2010 Jan 9.

Inflammation in atherosclerosis: transition from theory to practice.

Libby P(1), Okamoto Y, Rocha VZ, Folco E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. plibby@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Inflammation drives the formation, progression, and rupture of atherosclerotic
plaques. Experimental studies have demonstrated that an inflammatory subset of
monocytes/macrophages preferentially accumulate in atherosclerotic plaque and
produce proinflammatory cytokines. T lymphocytes can contribute to inflammatory
processes that promote thrombosis by stimulating production of collagen-degrading
proteinases and the potent procoagulant tissue factor. Recent data link obesity, 
inflammation, and modifiers of atherosclerotic events, a nexus of growing
clinical concern given the worldwide increase in the prevalence of obesity.
Modulators of inflammation derived from visceral adipose tissue evoke production 
of acute phase reactants in the liver, implicated in thrombogenesis and clot
stability. Additionally, C-reactive protein levels rise with increasing levels of
visceral adipose tissue. Adipose tissue in obese mice contains increased numbers 
of macrophages and T lymphocytes, increased T lymphocyte activation, and
increased interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) expression. IFN-gamma deficiency in mice
reduces production of inflammatory cytokines and inflammatory cell accumulation
in adipose tissue. Another series of in vitro and in vivo mouse experiments
affirmed that adiponectin, an adipocytokine, the plasma levels of which drop with
obesity, acts as an endogenous antiinflammatory modulator of both innate and
adaptive immunity in atherogenesis. Thus, accumulating experimental evidence
supports a key role for inflammation as a link between risk factors for
atherosclerosis and the biology that underlies the complications of this disease.
The recent JUPITER trial supports the clinical utility of an assessment of
inflammatory status in guiding intervention to limit cardiovascular events.
Inflammation is thus moving from a theoretical concept to a tool that provides
practical clinical utility in risk assessment and targeting of therapy.

PMID: 20065609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Jun;210(2):388-91. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.11.047. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Evaluation of translocator protein quantification as a tool for characterising
macrophage burden in human carotid atherosclerosis.

Bird JL(1), Izquierdo-Garcia D, Davies JR, Rudd JH, Probst KC, Figg N, Clark JC, 
Weissberg PL, Davenport AP, Warburton EA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, and Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United
Kingdom. jleb2@wbic.cam.ac.uk

Macrophage presence within atherosclerotic plaque is a feature of instability and
a risk factor for plaque rupture and clinical events. Activated macrophages
express high levels of the translocator protein/peripheral benzodiazepine
receptor (TSPO/PBR). In this study, we investigated the potential for quantifying
plaque inflammation by targeting this receptor. TSPO expression and distribution 
in the plaque were quantified using radioligand binding assays and
autoradiography. We show that cultured human macrophages expressed 20 times more 
TSPO than cultured human vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), the other abundant
cell type in plaque. The TSPO ligands
[3H](R)-1-(2-chlorophenyl)-N-methyl-(1-methylpropyl)-3-isoquinoline carboxamide
([3H](R)-PK11195) and
[3H]N-(2,5-dimethoxybenzyl)-N-(5-fluoro-2-phenoxyphenyl)acetamide ([3H]-DAA1106) 
bound to the same sites in human carotid atherosclerotic plaques in vitro, and
demonstrated significant correlation with macrophage-rich regions. In conclusion,
our data indicate that radioisotope-labelled DAA1106 has the potential to
quantify the macrophage content of atherosclerotic plaque.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2884178
PMID: 20056222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Open Cardiovasc Med J. 2010;4:30-7. doi: 10.2174/1874192401004020030. Epub 2010
Feb 23.

Implications of genetic polymorphisms in inflammation-induced atherosclerosis.

Shanker J(1), Kakkar VV.

Author information: 
(1)Thrombosis Research Institute, India.

Inflammation is the mainstay of atherosclerosis and is an important governing
factor at all stages of the disease process from lesion formation to plaque
build-up and final end-stage rupture and thrombosis. An overview of the numerous 
clinico-epidemiological studies on the association between inflammatory gene
polymorphisms and Cardiovascular disease (CVD) and its co-morbidities have shown 
that the risk associated with any single genotype is modest while the haplotypes,
especially those defined on the basis of tag-SNP approach, have better coverage
of the gene and show moderately higher impact on disease risk. Nevertheless, even
these associations have been inconsistent with low cross-race repeatability. This
has been attributed to many plausible causes such as clinical heterogeneity,
sample selection criteria, variable genetic landscapes across different ethnic
groups, confounding effect of co-morbidities etc. On the other hand, unbiased
studies such as the family-based linkage and case-control based associations that
have taken into account, thousands of genotypic markers spanning the whole
genome, have had the ability to identify novel genetic loci for coronary artery
disease. These studies have shown that many inflammatory genes are involved in
the regulation of specific biomarkers of inflammation that collectively
contribute to the disease-associated risk. In addition, there appears to be
considerable cross talk between the different biochemical and metabolic
processes. Therefore, consideration of all these factors can build towards an
'atherosclerotic bionetwork' that can refine our quest for developing a robust
risk stratification tool for cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC2840586
PMID: 21804639  [PubMed]


284. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2010 Feb;17(1):1-11. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

An update on the role of markers of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

Corrado E(1), Rizzo M, Coppola G, Fattouch K, Novo G, Marturana I, Ferrara F,
Novo S.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Cardiovascular Diseases, Division of Cardiology & Post-Graduate
School of Cardiology, University Hospital Paolo Giaccone of the University of
Palermo, Italy. egle.corrado@livero.it

In recent years, several studies have used the measurement of carotid
intima-media thickness (IMT) as a marker of early atherosclerosis: IMT has been
shown to correlate significantly with the presence of coronary artery disease
(CAD) and to predict fatal and not fatal cerebro- and cardio-vascular events.
These findings highlight the importance of recognizing and managing early stages 
of atherosclerosis for effective cardiovascular prevention. Beyond traditional
established cardiovascular risk factors, inflammation has been shown to be
crucial throughout atherosclerosis from endothelial dysfunction to plaque rupture
and thrombosis. Several studies have shown the existence of a strong relation
between CAD and fibrinogen or highly sensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels
and their predictive role has been examined through stratification or
multivariable statistical analyses: levels of these markers of inflammation have 
been independently associated with the incidence of coronary events after
adjusting for traditional cardiovascular risk factors. Recent studies have
further addressed the importance of therapeutical modulation of hs-CRP levels in 
high-risk patients for the prevention of vascular events. The strong relationship
between hs-CRP and IMT may potentially account for the complex role of hs-CRP and
IMT in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular events. However, beyond the utility of 
measuring markers of inflammation to assess patients with subclinical carotid
atherosclerosis at higher risk of vascular events, further studies are needed to 
evaluate the therapeutic implications in this category of patients.

PMID: 20032572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Semin Dial. 2009 Nov-Dec;22(6):644-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-139X.2009.00661.x.

Causes of dysregulation of lipid metabolism in chronic renal failure.

Vaziri ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Departments of Medicine, Physiology
and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
ndvaziri@uci.edu

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) is associated with accelerated atherosclerosis and
premature death from cardiovascular disease. These events are driven by oxidative
stress inflammation and lipid disorders. ESRD-induced lipid abnormalities
primarily stem from dysregulation of high-density lipoprotein (HDL),
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein metabolism, and oxidative modification of
lipoproteins. In this context, production and plasma concentration of Apo-I and
Apo-II are reduced, HDL maturation is impaired, HDL composition is altered, HDL
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions are depressed, clearance of
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and their atherogenic remnants is impaired, their 
composition is altered, and their plasma concentration is elevated in ESRD. The
associated defect in HDL maturation is largely caused by acquired
lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency while its triglyceride enrichment
is due to hepatic lipase deficiency. Hypertriglyceridemia, abnormal composition, 
and impaired clearance of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and their remnants are
mediated by down-regulation of lipoprotein lipase, hepatic lipase, very
low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) receptor, and LDL receptor-related protein,
relative reduction in ApoC-II/ApoC-III ratio, up-regulation of acyl-CoA
cholesterol acyltransferase, and elevated plasma level of cholesterol ester-poor 
prebeta HDL. Impaired clearance and accumulation of oxidation-prone VLDL and
chylomicron remnants and abnormal LDL composition in the face of oxidative stress
and inflammation favors their uptake by macrophages and resident cells in the
artery wall. The effect of heightened influx of lipids is compounded by impaired 
HDL-mediated reverse cholesterol transport leading to foam cell formation which
is the central event in atherosclerosis plaque formation and subsequent plaque
rupture, thrombosis, and tissue damage.

PMCID: PMC2874323
PMID: 20017835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2009;153:A847.

[New understanding of the onset of atherosclerosis--angiogenesis and hypoxia play
a crucial role].

[Article in Dutch]

Sluimer JC(1), Daemen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Pathologie, Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Clinical signs of atherosclerosis, such as heart attack and stroke, are often
caused by rupture of the cap of an atherosclerotic plaque, with thrombus
formation as a consequence. The risk of rupture depends on the formation of
microvessels (angiogenesis) in the plaque. The fragility of the microvascular
endothelium causes hyperpermeability, which leads to intraplaque haemorrhage.
Angiogenesis is stimulated by hypoxia, oxidative stress and the production of
hypoxia-inducible transcription factors. Hypoxia is primarily caused by increased
oxygen consumption of inflammatory cells, while plaque thickness, which reduces
oxygen diffusion, contributes to a limited extent. A vicious circle of hypoxia,
(incomplete) angiogenesis and inflammation occurs deep in the plaque, which
enhances plaque growth and the risk of plaque rupture. By non-invasive imaging of
plaque hypoxia and angiogenesis, plaques at risk of rupture may be identified.
Therapeutic interventions for plaque angiogenesis and hypoxia require further
investigation.

PMID: 20015418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2010 Jan;19(1):161-8. doi: 10.1517/13543780903501513.

Darapladib.

Bui QT(1), Wilensky RL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Cardiovascular Institute, Cardiovascular Division, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory-immune mediated
disease process. Plaque rupture is responsible for the clinical events of
ischemic death, myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndromes and ischemic
strokes. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2) (Lp-PLA(2)) seems to play a
major role in the development of such high-risk lesions, in both the coronary and
carotid arteries. Darapladib is a selective inhibitor of Lp-PLA(2).
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: An overview of darapladib by reviewing the studies 
(1990 - 2009) that have provided the rationale for the development of darapladib;
and a discussion of its potential merit as a new therapeutic drug to target
high-risk atherosclerosis.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: The reader should gain an understanding of the
importance of inflammation during atherogenesis as well as of the biology of
Lp-PLA(2) and its proatherogenic role. Additional insights will be gained into
the role of selective inhibitors of Lp-PLA(2) as new therapeutic agents.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Darapladib is a selective inhibitor of Lp-PLA(2) and
represents a new class of therapeutic agents that target inflammation to treat
high-risk atherosclerosis.

PMID: 20001561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Cell Mol Med. 2010 Jan;14(1-2):70-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00978.x.
Epub 2009 Nov 28.

The vicious circle between oxidative stress and inflammation in atherosclerosis.

Hulsmans M(1), Holvoet P.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis and Metabolism Unit, Department of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

The initial event in atherogenesis is the increased transcytosis of low density
lipoprotein, and its subsequent deposition, retention and modification in the
subendothelium. It is followed by the infiltration of activated inflammatory
cells from the coronary circulation into the arterial wall. There they secrete
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and produce oxidized lipoproteins capable of
inducing endothelial cell apoptosis, and thereby plaque erosion. Activated T
lymphocytes, macrophages and mast cells, accumulate in the eroded plaque where
they secrete a variety of proteases capable of inducing degradation of
extracellular proteins, thereby rendering the plaques more prone to rupture. This
review summarizes the recent advancements in the understanding of the roles of
ROS and oxidized lipoproteins in the activation of inflammatory cells and
inducing signalling pathways related to cell death and apoptosis. In addition, it
presents evidence that this vicious circle between oxidative stress and
inflammation does not only occur in the diseased arterial wall, but also in
adipose tissues. There, oxidative stress and inflammation impair adipocyte
maturation resulting in defective insulin action and adipocytokine signalling.
The latter is associated with increased infiltration of inflammatory cells, loss 
of anti-oxidant protection and cell death in the arterial wall.

PMCID: PMC3837590
PMID: 19968738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. QJM. 2010 Apr;103(4):213-28. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcp168. Epub 2009 Dec 2.

Pioglitazone and mechanisms of CV protection.

Erdmann E(1), Wilcox R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Heart Center, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
erland.erdmann@uni-koeln.de

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Pioglitazone has diverse multiple effects on metabolic and
inflammatory processes that have the potential to influence cardiovascular
disease pathophysiology at various points in the disease process, including
atherogenesis, plaque inflammation, plaque rupture, haemostatic disturbances and 
microangiopathy.
RESULTS: Linking the many direct and indirect effects on the vasculature to the
reduction in key macrovascular outcomes reported with pioglitazone in patients
with type 2 diabetes presents a considerable challenge. However, recent
large-scale clinical cardiovascular imaging studies are beginning to provide some
mechanistic insights, including a potentially important role for improvements in 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol with pioglitazone. In addition to a role in 
prevention, animal studies also suggest that pioglitazone may minimize damage and
improve recovery during and after ischaemic cardio- and cerebrovascular events.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this review, we consider potential cardiovascular
protective mechanisms of pioglitazone by linking preclinical data and clinical
cardiovascular outcomes guided by insights from recent imaging studies.
CONCLUSION: Pioglitazone may influence CVD pathophysiology at multiple points in 
the disease process, including atherogenesis, plaque inflammation, plaque rupture
and haemostatic disturbances (i.e. thrombus/embolism formation), as well as
microangiopathy.

PMID: 19955228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Angiogenes Res. 2009 Sep 21;1:6. doi: 10.1186/2040-2384-1-6.

CD105 positive neovessels are prevalent in early stage carotid lesions, and
correlate with the grade in more advanced carotid and coronary plaques.

Luque A(1), Slevin M, Turu MM, Juan-Babot O, Badimon L, Krupinski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Stroke Unit, Hospital Universitari Mutua Terrassa,
Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain. aluque@csic-iccc.org

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated that expression of CD105 is a
sensitive marker and indicator of endothelial cell/microvessel activation and
proliferation in aggressive solid tumour growth and atherosclerotic plaque
lesions. Since intimal neovascularization contributes significantly to subsequent
plaque instability, haemorrhage and rupture.
METHODS: We have used immunohistochemical analysis to investigate the expression 
of CD105-positive vessels in both large (carotid) and medium calibre (coronary
and middle cerebral artery, MCAs) diseased vessels in an attempt to identify any 
correlation with plaque growth, stage and complication/type.
RESULTS: Here we show, that carotid arteries expressed intimal neovascularization
associated with CD105-positive endothelial cells, concomitant with increased
inflammation in early stage lesions, preatheroma (I-III) whilst they were not
present in coronary plaques of the same grade. Some of these CD105-positive
neovessels were immature, thin walled and without smooth muscle cell coverage
making them more prone to haemorrhage and rupture. In high-grade lesions,
neovessel proliferation was similar in both arterial types and significantly
higher numbers of CD105-positive vasa vasorum were associated with plaque regions
in coronary arteries. In contrast, although the MCAs exhibited expanded intimas
and established plaques, there were very few CD105 positive neovessels.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that CD105 is a useful marker of angiogenesis within
adventitial and intimal vessels and suggest the existence of significant
differences in the pathological development of atherosclerosis in separate
vascular beds which may have important consequences when considering management
and treatment of this disease.

PMCID: PMC2776238
PMID: 19946414  [PubMed]


291. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2011 Jan-Feb;20(1):51-7. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2009.08.004.
Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Sudden coronary death caused by pathologic intimal thickening without
atheromatous plaque formation.

Tavora F(1), Cresswell N, Li L, Ripple M, Fowler D, Burke A.

Author information: 
(1)Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC, USA.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Pathol. 2012 Mar-Apr;21(2):e31-2; author reply e33.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic plaques progress from early lesions with little free 
cholesterol and lipid to late fibroatheromas with necrotic cores that may
rupture. The frequency of severe coronary atherosclerosis without core formation 
in any artery in sudden coronary death is not known.
METHODS: We studied 314 hearts from 253 men and 61 women who died suddenly from
severe coronary stenosis (≥ 1 epicardial artery with ≥ 75% luminal area
narrowing) and with no other cause of death. If no section demonstrated any
necrotic core, the designation was nonatheromatous atherosclerosis; if there was 
≥ 1 necrotic core, the designation was atheromatous atherosclerosis. Plaques were
scored for the presence of calcification, intimal inflammation, and
neovasculature on a 5-point scale. Plaque burden was estimated
semiquantitatively.
RESULTS: In 22 men (9%) and 14 women (23%), there were no necrotic cores in any
plaque (nonatheromatous atherosclerosis). Fourteen of these 36 nonatheromatous
atherosclerosis cases had focal acute thrombus due to erosion (39%). Of the
remaining 278 cases (atheromatous atherosclerosis), acute erosions were present
in 25 (9%; P<.0001). Sudden death due to nonatheromatous atherosclerosis occurred
more frequently in women (P<.001), in Blacks (20%; P=.003), and at a younger age 
(44± 12 years) than atheromatous atherosclerosis (52 ± 12 years; P=.0003). On
multivariate analysis, nonatheromatous atherosclerosis was associated with
younger age (P=.001), female gender (P=.004), and Black race (P=.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Nonatheromatous atherosclerosis constitutes slightly >10% of sudden 
coronary deaths and is more frequent in young Black women. Nonatheromatous
atherosclerosis is a relatively infrequent pathway for coronary plaque
progression, leading to severe disease and sudden death that may involve plaque
erosion.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 19913444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Vasc Res. 2010;47(3):231-40. doi: 10.1159/000255966. Epub 2009 Nov 6.

Transglutaminase 2 deficiency decreases plaque fibrosis and increases plaque
inflammation in apolipoprotein-E-deficient mice.

Van Herck JL(1), Schrijvers DM, De Meyer GR, Martinet W, Van Hove CE, Bult H,
Vrints CJ, Herman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
jozef.vanherck@ua.ac.be

AIM: Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is important for the deposition and stability of
the extracellular matrix via effects on cross-linking of matrix proteins and
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) activity. The purpose of this study was
to investigate the effect of TG2 deficiency on the composi- tion of
atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS: Apolipoprotein E (ApoE)(-/-) mice were crossbred with TG2(-/-) mice to
obtain ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice. ApoE(-/-) and ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice were fed a
Western-type diet for 16 or 30 weeks to determine the effect of TG2 deficiency on
early and advanced atherosclerosis, respectively.
RESULTS: Atherosclerotic plaques of ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice showed decreased
cross-linking of matrix proteins, as well as decreased nuclear staining for
phospho-Smad2/-Smad3, indicative of decreased TGFbeta activity. Compared to
ApoE(-/-) mice, plaque area was decreased by 45 and 48% in ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice
after 16 and 30 weeks, respectively. Sirius red staining showed a significant
decrease in collagen content in early and advanced atherosclerotic plaques of
ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice. Furthermore, there was a significant increase in
macrophages in advanced atherosclerotic plaques of ApoE(-/-)TG2(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSION: TG2 deficiency resulted in a decreased collagen content and increased
inflammation, which are features of a more unstable plaque.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19893320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2009 Dec 13;367(1908):4877-86. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2009.0142.

Mathematical modelling of atherosclerosis as an inflammatory disease.

El Khatib N(1), Génieys S, Kazmierczak B, Volpert V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Camille Jordan, CNRS, UMR 5208, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 43 
Boulevard du 11 Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France.
nader@math.univ-lyon1.fr

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease. The atherosclerosis process starts
when low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) enter the intima of the blood vessel, where 
they are oxidized (ox-LDLs). The anti-inflammatory response triggers the
recruitment of monocytes. Once in the intima, the monocytes are transformed into 
macrophages and foam cells, leading to the production of inflammatory cytokines
and further recruitment of monocytes. This auto-amplified process leads to the
formation of an atherosclerotic plaque and, possibly, to its rupture. In this
paper we develop two mathematical models based on reaction-diffusion equations in
order to explain the inflammatory process. The first model is one-dimensional: it
does not consider the intima's thickness and shows that low ox-LDL concentrations
in the intima do not lead to a chronic inflammatory reaction. Intermediate ox-LDL
concentrations correspond to a bistable system, which can lead to a travelling
wave that can be initiated by certain conditions, such as infection or injury.
High ox-LDL concentrations correspond to a monostable system, and even a small
perturbation of the non-inflammatory case leads to travelling-wave propagation,
which corresponds to a chronic inflammatory response. The second model we suggest
is two-dimensional: it represents a reaction-diffusion system in a strip with
nonlinear boundary conditions to describe the recruitment of monocytes as a
function of the cytokines' concentration. We prove the existence of travelling
waves and confirm our previous results, which show that atherosclerosis develops 
as a reaction-diffusion wave. The results of the two models are confirmed by
numerical simulations. The latter show that the two-dimensional model converges
to the one-dimensional one if the thickness of the intima tends to zero.

PMID: 19884184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009 Sep;2(5):391-6. doi:
10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.108.801712. Epub 2009 Aug 17.

Increased neovascularization in advanced lipid-rich atherosclerotic lesions
detected by gadofluorine-M-enhanced MRI: implications for plaque vulnerability.

Sirol M(1), Moreno PR, Purushothaman KR, Vucic E, Amirbekian V, Weinmann HJ,
Muntner P, Fuster V, Fayad ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Lariboisière University Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Université Paris 7-Denis Diderot, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation and neovascularization may play a significant role in
atherosclerotic plaque progression and rupture. We evaluated
gadofluorine-M-enhanced MRI for detection of plaque inflammation and
neovascularization in an animal model of atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixteen rabbits with aortic plaque and 6 normal control
rabbits underwent gadofluorine-M-enhanced MRI. Eight rabbits had advanced
atherosclerotic lesions, whereas the remaining 8 had early lesions. Magnetic
resonance atherosclerotic plaque enhancement was meticulously compared with
plaque inflammation and neovessel density as assessed by histopathology. Advanced
plaques and early atheroma were enhanced after gadofluorine-M injection. Control 
animals displayed no enhancement. After accounting for the within-animal
correlation of observations, mean contrast-to-noise ratio was significantly
higher in advanced plaques than compared with early atheroma (4.29+/-0.21 versus 
3.00+/-0.32; P=0.004). Macrophage density was higher in advanced plaques in
comparison to early atheroma (geometric mean=0.50 [95% CI, 0.19 to 1.03] versus
0.25 [0.07 to 0.42]; P=0.05). Furthermore, higher neovessel density was observed 
in advanced plaques (1.83 [95% CI, 1.51 to 2.21] versus 1.29 [0.99 to 1.69];
P=0.05). The plaque accumulation of gadofluorine-M correlated with increased
neovessel density as shown by linear regression analysis (r=0.67; P<0.001).
Confocal and fluorescence microscopy revealed colocalization of gadofluorine-M
with plaque areas containing a high density of neovessels.
CONCLUSIONS: Gadofluorine-M-enhanced MRI is effective for in vivo detection of
atherosclerotic plaque inflammation and neovascularization in an animal model of 
atherosclerosis. These findings suggest that gadofluorine-M enhancement reflects 
the presence of high-risk plaque features believed to be associated with plaque
rupture. Gadofluorine-M plaque enhancement may therefore provide functional
assessment of atherosclerotic plaque in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4073689
PMID: 19808627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009 May;2(3):226-34. doi:
10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.108.826826. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Comparison of gadofluorine-M and Gd-DTPA for noninvasive staging of
atherosclerotic plaque stability using MRI.

Ronald JA(1), Chen Y, Belisle AJ, Hamilton AM, Rogers KA, Hegele RA, Misselwitz
B, Rutt BK.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. jronald@imaging.robarts.ca

BACKGROUND: Inflammation and neovascularization play critical roles in the
stability of atherosclerotic plaques. Whole-body quantitative assessment of these
plaque features may improve patient risk-stratification for life-threatening
thromboembolic events and direct appropriate intervention. In this report, we
determined the utility of the MR contrast agent gadofluorine-M (GdF) for staging 
plaque stability and compared this to the conventional agent Gd-DTPA.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Five control and 7 atherosclerotic rabbits were sequentially
imaged after administration of Gd-DTPA (0.2 mmol/kg) and GdF (0.1 mmol/kg) using 
a T(1)-weighted pulse sequence on a 3-T MRI scanner. Diseased aortic wall could
be distinguished from normal wall based on wall-to-muscle contrast-to-noise
values after GdF administration. RAM-11 (macrophages) and CD-31 (endothelial
cells) immunostaining of MR-matched histological sections revealed that GdF
accumulation was related to the degree of inflammation at the surface of plaques 
and the extent of core neovascularization. Importantly, an MR measure of GdF
accumulation at both 1 and 24 hours after injection but not Gd-DTPA at peak
enhancement was shown to correlate with a quantitative histological morphology
index related to these 2 plaque features.
CONCLUSIONS: GdF-enhanced MRI of atherosclerotic plaques allows noninvasive
quantitative information about plaque composition to be acquired at multiple time
points after injection (within 1 and up to 24 hours after injection). This
dramatically widens the imaging window for assessing plaque stability that is
currently attainable with clinically approved MR agents, therefore opening the
possibility of whole-body (including coronary) detection of unstable plaques in
the future and potentially improved mitigation of cataclysmic cardiovascular
events.

PMCID: PMC2759097
PMID: 19808597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 Dec;297(6):H2004-14. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00208.2009. Epub 2009 Oct 2.

Traditional Chinese medication Tongxinluo dose-dependently enhances stability of 
vulnerable plaques: a comparison with a high-dose simvastatin therapy.

Zhang L(1), Liu Y, Lu XT, Wu YL, Zhang C, Ji XP, Wang R, Liu CX, Feng JB, Jiang
H, Xu XS, Zhao YX, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education, Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan, No. 107, Wen Hua
Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 Dec;297(6):H1967-9.

This study was carried out to test the hypothesis that Tongxinluo (TXL) as a
Chinese herbal medicine enhances stability of vulnerable plaque dose dependently 
via lipid-lowering and anti-inflammation effects, similar to a high-dose
simvastatin therapy. After abdominal aortic balloon injury, 75 rabbits were fed a
1% cholesterol diet for 10 wk and were then divided into five groups for 8-wk
treatment: control group, low-dose TXL group, moderate-dose TXL group, high-dose 
TXL group, and high-dose simvastatin group. At the end of week 16, an adenovirus 
containing p53 was injected into the abdominal aortic plaques. Two weeks later,
plaque rupture was induced by pharmacological triggering. The incidence of plaque
rupture in all treatment groups (14.3%, 7.1%, 7.7%, and 7.1%) was significantly
lower than that in control group (73.3%; P>0.01). TXL dose-dependently lowered
serum lipid levels and inhibited systemic inflammation. Corrected acoustic
intensity and fibrous cap thickness of the aortic plaques were significantly
increased, whereas plaque area, plaque burden, vulnerable index, and expression
of oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) receptor 1, matrix metalloproteinase
1 (MMP-1), MMP-3, tissue inhibitor of MMP 1, and NF-kappaB in plaques were
markedly reduced in all treatment groups when compared with the control group.
Similar to high-dose simvastatin group, high-dose TXL group exhibited a low serum
level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and ox-LDL, a low expression level
of systemic and local inflammatory factors and a low plaque vulnerability index, 
with no differences in the incidence of plaque rupture among all treatment
groups. TXL dose-dependently enhances the stability of vulnerable plaques and
prevents plaques from rupture. Simvastatin and TXL offer similar protection in
terms of lipid-lowering, anti-inflammation, and antioxidation effects.

PMID: 19801495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Imaging. 2009 Sep-Oct;8(5):291-301.

Molecular imaging of cathepsin B proteolytic enzyme activity reflects the
inflammatory component of atherosclerotic pathology and can quantitatively
demonstrate the antiatherosclerotic therapeutic effects of atorvastatin and
glucosamine.

Kim DE(1), Kim JY, Schellingerhout D, Shon SM, Jeong SW, Kim EJ, Kim WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Republic
of Korea. kdongeog@duih.org

Inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques causes plaque vulnerability and rupture, 
leading to thromboembolic complications. Cathepsin B (CatB) proteases secreted by
macrophages play a major role in plaque inflammation. We used a CatB-activatable 
near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) imaging agent to demonstrate the inflammatory
component in mice atheromata and the atherosclerosis- modulating effects of
atorvastatin or glucosamine treatments. Apolipoprotein E knockout mice (n = 35)
were fed normal chow, a Western diet, a Western diet + atorvastatin, a Western
diet + glucosamine, or a Western diet + atorvastatin + glucosamine for 14 weeks. 
Twenty-four hours after the intravenous injection of a CatB-activatable probe, ex
vivo NIRF imaging of the aortas and brains was performed, followed by histology. 
The CatB-related signal, observed in the aortas but not in the cerebral arteries,
correlated very well with protease activity and the presence of macrophages on
histology. Animals on Western diets could be distinguished from animals on a
normal diet. The antiatherosclerotic effects of atorvastatin and glucosamine
could be demonstrated, with reduced CatB-related signal compared with untreated
animals. Plaque populations were heterogeneous within individuals, with some
plaques showing a high and others a lower CatB-related signal. These differences 
in signal intensity could not be predicted by visual inspection of the plaques
but did correlate with histologic evidence of inflammation in every case. This
suggests that vulnerable inflamed plaques can be identified by optical molecular 
imaging.

PMID: 19796606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2010 Jan;26(1):41-8. doi: 10.1007/s10554-009-9506-6.
Epub 2009 Sep 22.

FDG-PET can distinguish inflamed from non-inflamed plaque in an animal model of
atherosclerosis.

Davies JR(1), Izquierdo-Garcia D, Rudd JH, Figg N, Richards HK, Bird JL,
Aigbirhio FI, Davenport AP, Weissberg PL, Fryer TD, Warburton EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

The presence of activated macrophages is an important predictor of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture. In this study, our aim was to determine the
accuracy of (18)F- fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) microPET imaging for quantifying
aortic wall macrophage content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Rabbits were
divided into a control group and two groups post aortic balloon injury: 6 months 
high-cholesterol diet (HC); and 3 months HC followed by 3 months low-cholesterol 
diet plus statin (LCS). In vivo and ex vivo microPET, ex vivo well counting and
histological quantification of the atherosclerotic aortas were performed for all 
groups. Macrophage density was greater in the HC group than the LCS group (5.1
+/- 1.4% vs. 0.6 +/- 0.7%, P < 0.001) with a trend towards greater macrophage
density in LCS compared to controls (P = 0.08). There was a strong correlation
across all groups between macrophage density and standardized uptake value (SUV) 
derived from ex vivo microPET (r = 0.95, P < 0.001) and well counting (r = 0.96, 
P < 0.001). Ex vivo FDG SUV was significantly different between the three groups 
(P < 0.001). However, the correlation between in vivo microPET FDG SUV and
macrophage density was insignificant (r = 0.16, P = 0.57) with no statistical
differences in FDG SUV seen between the three groups. This study confirms that in
an animal model of inflamed and non-inflamed atherosclerosis, significant
differences in FDG SUV allow differentiation of highly inflamed atherosclerotic
aortas from those stabilized by statin therapy and low cholesterol diet and
controls.

PMID: 19784796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010 May;49(5):837-43. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kep225.
Epub 2009 Sep 24.

Association of myocardial infarctions with COX-2 inhibition may be related to
immunomodulation towards a Th1 response resulting in atheromatous plaque
instability: an evidence-based interpretation.

Padol IT(1), Hunt RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Farncombe Family
Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University Health Science Centre,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010 May;49(5):834-6.

Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors remain a major class of drugs in rheumatology and
their widespread use is expected to continue. The view that a prothrombotic
effect explains the increase in myocardial infarction (MI) associated with both
COX-2 selective and traditional NSAIDs (tNSAIDs) has been increasingly
questioned. We review the evidence that prostanoids direct the immune response
away from a Th1 response and that consequently inhibition of prostaglandin
synthesis results in augmentation of the Th1 response by limiting prostanoid
synthesis. Although the role of prostanoids as mediators of inflammation in the
periphery is well understood, the systemic immunomodulatory role of prostanoids
shifting the immune response away from a Th1 type is less appreciated.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory arterial disease driven by a Th1 type immune
response. Moreover, the vulnerable phenotype of atheroma is associated with the
cellular Th1 immune response in contrast to the stable plaque phenotype
associated with a Th2 type response. We propose a class effect of COX-2 selective
and tNSAIDs, which results in augmentation of Th1-mediated atherogenesis/
production of pro-atherogenic cytokines associated with detrimental plaque
remodeling, instability, rupture and embolization resulting in MI. Understanding 
of the Th1 mediated immunity, which underlies the cardiovascular, and the
non-Th1, which underlies gastrointestinal adverse effects associated with the use
of COX inhibitors, should lead to better risk assessment and the development of
anti-inflammatory treatments with improved safety. Our explanation also
emphasizes the pharmacological effects and consequences of immunomodulation in
the inflammation associated with atherosclerosis and other Th1- as well as
non-Th1-driven diseases.

PMID: 19779026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2010 Jan;26(1):111-9. doi: 10.1007/s10554-009-9500-z.
Epub 2009 Sep 17.

Spectroscopy to improve identification of vulnerable plaques in cardiovascular
disease.

Bruggink JL(1), Meerwaldt R, van Dam GM, Lefrandt JD, Slart RH, Tio RA, Smit AJ, 
Zeebregts CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Many apparent healthy persons die from cardiovascular disease, despite major
advances in prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Traditional
cardiovascular risk factors are able to predict cardiovascular events in the long
run, but fail to assess current disease activity or nearby cardiovascular events.
There is a clear relation between the occurrence of cardiovascular events and the
presence of so-called vulnerable plaques. These vulnerable plaques are
characterized by active inflammation, a thin cap and a large lipid pool.
Spectroscopy is an optical imaging technique which depicts the interaction
between light and tissues, and thereby shows the biochemical composition of
tissues. In recent years, impressive advances have been made in spectroscopy
technology and intravascular spectroscopy is able to assess the composition of
plaques of interest and thereby to identify and actually quantify plaque
vulnerability. This review summarizes the current evidence for spectroscopy as a 
measure of plaque vulnerability and discusses the potential role of intravascular
spectroscopic imaging techniques.

PMID: 19760516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2009 Jun;62 Suppl 2:2-8.

[Visualizing arterial macrophage warfare with nuclear magnetic resonance,
positron-emission tomography and computerized tomography].

[Article in Spanish]

Fuster V(1), Sanz J.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Medical Center, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1030, New York, NY
10029-6574, USA.

The macrophage is the principal immune cell found in atherosclerotic plaque.
Although its function is to phagocytose foreign bodies present in the vascular
endothelium, it can undergo a process of sustained activation that gives rise to 
a pattern of chronic inflammation, which may even trigger an acute coronary
syndrome. The cellular response underlying this disease process is mediated by a 
complex molecular signaling cascade. Cytokines released by activated macrophages 
ultimately produce significant tissue damage by perpetuating the ongoing
inflammatory response. Recent studies have shown that a defective interaction
between the macrophage and its substrate could provide a mechanism for
destabilizing atherosclerotic plaque by stimulating digestion of the artery and
promoting plaque rupture. A key element in the life cycle of macrophages is that,
when they cannot effectively remove the foreign bodies that have resulted in
their activation, they initiate cell death (i.e., apoptosis), thereby releasing
substances into the extracellular milieu that are even more toxic than
inflammatory mediators. The significant advances in noninvasive molecular imaging
techniques that have taken place in recent years have helped to unravel
fundamental features of macrophage biology and have made it possible to explore
the potential benefits of specific therapeutic interventions. Nanomarkers
designed to home in on specific molecular targets have enabled imaging techniques
to be used not only to study the pathophysiological mechanisms of atherosclerotic
disease but also to diagnose such disease, and have made it possible to imagine
the development of a form of nanomedicine based on administering treatment that
can target a single cell type.

PMID: 19709530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Med Pregl. 2009;62 Suppl 3:7-14.

Low and high density lipoprotein--cholesterol and coronary atherothrombosis.

Kanjuh V(1), Ostojić M, Lalić N, Stokić E, Adić-Cemerlić N, Gojković-Bukarica L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Pathology, University School of Medicine (Postgraduate), 11000 
Belgrade, Dobracina 12. kanjuh@eunet.rs

After reviewing the general characteristics of lipids (LDL-C, VLDL-C, HDL-C) and 
atherothrombosis, including the I-VIII degrees of its histopathological arterial 
lesions (with contributions of J. E. Edwards and R. Virmani), the authors
described the P. Libby's data on lipoprotein-associated phospholipaseA2 (Lp-PLA2)
and its two inflammatory mediators: lysophosphatidylcholine and oxidized
nonesterified fatty acids. They are involved in plaque progression and
vulnerability. Lp-PLA2 is an emerging proinflammatory marker. The new drug
darapladib inhibits Lp-PLA2 and acts against inflammation. LDL-C is present in
the atherosclerotic plaque from the circulating blood in arterial lumen (through 
the dysfunctional endothelium) and vasa vasorum as well as after the
decomposition of foam cells (monocytes-phagocytes, smooth muscle and dendritic
cells) and outpoured erythrocytes (its membranes) after hemorrhage. The blood
from the arterial lumen can also enter the atherosclerotic plaque through the
lesions in its fibrous cap (erosion, fissure, rupture). Atherosclerosis as a
disease or as an inevitable accompaniment of aging ("the senescence hypothesis").
The familial hypercholesterolemia is usually due to mutation of just one gene--a 
defective LDL-C receptor gene on chromosome 19. The accelerated and severe
atherosclerosis very resistant to therapy occurs. The patients with homozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia can die of myocardial infarction in early
childhood. Therapeutic decrease of LDL-C and increase of HDL-C slows down the
evolution of atherosclerosis, stabilizes the atherosclerotic plaques, and even
brings about their partial regression. Statins, niacin, ezetimibe, LDL-C
apheresis, and surgery: shunt between the portal and inferior caval veins, liver 
transplantation, and partial ileal bypass. The elevated LDL-C is the most
established risk factor for atherosclerosis with impact on coronary heart disease
mortality of 26%, and it should be the primary target of preventive and
therapeutic efforts.

PMID: 19702110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Feb;208(2):572-80. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.07.048. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

A pathobiologic link between risk factors profile and morphological markers of
carotid instability.

Mauriello A(1), Sangiorgi GM, Virmani R, Trimarchi S, Holmes DR Jr, Kolodgie FD, 
Piepgras DG, Piperno G, Liotti D, Narula J, Righini P, Ippoliti A, Spagnoli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Anatomia ed Istologia Patologica, Dipartimento di Biopatologia e
Diagnostica per Immagini, Anatomic Pathology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via
Montpellier 1, 00133 Roma, Italy. alessandro.mauriello@uniroma2.it

OBJECTIVE: Although cardiovascular risk factors have been strongly linked to
carotid intimal-media thickness, their association with plaque progression
towards instability is poorly understood. We evaluated a large database of
endarterectomy specimens removed from symptomatic and asymptomatic patients to
determine the correlation between major cardiovascular risk factors and carotid
plaque morphology.
METHODS: Incidence of thrombotic, vulnerable and stable plaques together with the
degree of plaque inflammatory infiltration was evaluated in 457 carotid
atherosclerotic lesions. Clinical records were reviewed in all cases for risk
factors profile.
RESULTS: Thrombotic plaques were more frequently observed in patients affected by
stroke (66.9%) as compared to TIA (36.1%) and asymptomatic patients (26.8%,
p<0.001). Out of 457 carotid plaques removed during carotid endarterectomy, 181
(39.6%) were represented by thrombotic plaques, 72 (15.8%) by vulnerable plaques 
(thin cap fibroateroma) and 204 (44.6%) by stable plaques. At the multivariate
analysis, a strong association was observed between hypertension, low
HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) and ratio of total to HDL-C >5 with vulnerable and
thrombotic carotid plaques. Hypertension (p=0.001), hypercholesterolemia (p=0.05)
and low HDL-C (p=0.001) significantly also correlated with the presence of high
inflammatory infiltrate of the plaque. When multivariate analysis was restricted 
to asymptomatic patients, hypertension (p=0.009, OR 2.29), low HDL-cholesterol
(p=0.01 OR 2.21) and the ratio of total to HDL-C >5 (p=0.03, OR 2.07) were
confirmed to be the risk factors most significantly associated to unstable
plaques. The relative risk to carry an unstable plaque for asymptomatic patients 
with high Framingham Risk Score as compared with those with low risk score was
2.06 (95% C.I., 1.26-3.36).
CONCLUSIONS: The present histopathological study identifies risk factors
predictive of increased risk of carotid plaque rupture and thrombosis.
Asymptomatic patients with high risk factors profile may constitute a specific
target to reduce the likelihood of cerebrovascular accidents even in the presence
of non-flow-limiting plaque.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19683236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Thromb Haemost. 2009 Aug;102(2):248-57. doi: 10.1160/TH09-03-0192.

Mechanisms of platelet activation: need for new strategies to protect against
platelet-mediated atherothrombosis.

Jennings LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
ljennin2@utmem.edu

Platelets are central mediators of haemostasis at sites of vascular injury, but
they also mediate pathologic thrombosis. Activated platelets stimulate thrombus
formation in response to rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque or endothelial cell
erosion, promoting atherothrombotic disease. They also interact with endothelial 
cells and leukocytes to promote inflammation, which contributes to
atherosclerosis. Multiple pathways contribute to platelet activation, and current
oral antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a P2Y(12) adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 
receptor antagonist target the thromboxane A(2) and ADP pathways, respectively.
Both can diminish activation by other factors, but the extent of their effects
depends upon the agonist, agonist strength, and platelet reactivity status.
Although these agents have demonstrated significant clinical benefit, residual
morbidity and mortality remain high. Neither agent is effective in inhibiting
thrombin, the most potent platelet activator. This lack of comprehensive
inhibition of platelet function allows continued thrombus formation and exposes
patients to risk for recurrent thrombotic events. Moreover, bleeding risk is a
substantial limitation of antiplatelet therapy, because these agents target
platelet activation pathways critical for both protective haemostasis and
pathologic thrombosis. Novel antiplatelet therapies that provide more complete
inhibition of platelet activation without increasing bleeding risk could
considerably decrease residual risk for ischemic events. Inhibition of the
protease-activated receptor (PAR)-1 platelet activation pathway stimulated by
thrombin is a novel, emerging approach to achieve more comprehensive inhibition
of platelet activation when used in combination with current oral antiplatelet
agents. PAR-1 inhibition is not expected to increase bleeding risk, as this
pathway does not interfere with haemostasis.

PMID: 19652875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Thromb Haemost. 2009 Aug;102(2):231-9. doi: 10.1160/TH09-01-0030.

The vulnerable patient: refocusing on the plaque?

Eijgelaar WJ(1), Heeneman S, Daemen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. Wouter.Eijgelaar@PATH.unimaas.nl

The term 'vulnerable plaque' is used to refer to the lesions that are prone to
rupture and may cause life-threatening events like acute coronary syndrome or
stroke. The study of the vulnerable plaque phenotype and its detection has
attracted increasing interest over the past decades. During this time, there have
been some remarkable transitions in the paradigm on methods to identify patients 
at risk or patients to treat. Whereas formerly, the key factors used to determine
an individual's risk were primarily population-based traditional risk factors
such as age, sex, body mass index, hypertension etc., new approaches are based on
conditional risk factors that represent an individual's current risk of suffering
a cardiovascular event. These population based risk factors fall short in
predicting near-future events in a high-risk individual. In the early 2000s, the 
focus of research into surrogate markers for cardiovascular event prediction
shifted from the vulnerable plaque to the identification of the vulnerable
patient. This new paradigm stimulated a number of new initiatives that aimed to
identify vulnerable patients by testing systemic biomarkers that could identify
patients at high risk for cardiovascular events. A second research paradigm is
refocusing on the plaque by searching for plaque-derived biomarkers and
non-invasive imaging modalities to assess characteristics of a plaque that
determine its vulnerability. Although both concepts are attractive, they still
need proper validation in large multicenter cohorts, while cost-effectiveness
arguments also need to be assessed.

PMID: 19652873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Circulation. 2009 Aug 18;120(7):592-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.813998.
Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Enzyme-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging targeting myeloperoxidase identifies 
active inflammation in experimental rabbit atherosclerotic plaques.

Ronald JA(1), Chen JW, Chen Y, Hamilton AM, Rodriguez E, Reynolds F, Hegele RA,
Rogers KA, Querol M, Bogdanov A, Weissleder R, Rutt BK.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada. jronald1@stanfor.edu

BACKGROUND: Inflammation undermines the stability of atherosclerotic plaques,
rendering them susceptible to acute rupture, the cataclysmic event that underlies
clinical expression of this disease. Myeloperoxidase is a central inflammatory
enzyme secreted by activated macrophages and is involved in multiple stages of
plaque destabilization and patient outcome. We report here that a unique
functional in vivo magnetic resonance agent can visualize myeloperoxidase
activity in atherosclerotic plaques in a rabbit model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed magnetic resonance imaging of the thoracic
aorta of New Zealand White rabbits fed a cholesterol (n=14) or normal (n=4) diet 
up to 2 hours after injection of the myeloperoxidase sensor bis-5HT-DTPA(Gd)
[MPO(Gd)], the conventional agent DTPA(Gd), or an MPO(Gd) analog,
bis-tyr-DTPA(Gd), as controls. Delayed MPO(Gd) images (2 hours after injection)
showed focal areas of increased contrast (>2-fold) in diseased wall but not in
normal wall (P=0.84) compared with both DTPA(Gd) (n=11; P<0.001) and
bis-tyr-DTPA(Gd) (n=3; P<0.05). Biochemical assays confirmed that diseased wall
possessed 3-fold elevated myeloperoxidase activity compared with normal wall
(P<0.01). Areas detected by MPO(Gd) imaging colocalized and correlated with
myeloperoxidase-rich areas infiltrated by macrophages on histopathological
evaluations (r=0.91, P<0.0001). Although macrophages were the main source of
myeloperoxidase, not all macrophages secreted myeloperoxidase, which suggests
that distinct subpopulations contribute differently to atherogenesis and supports
our functional approach.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study represents a unique approach in the detection of
inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques by examining macrophage function and the 
activity of an effector enzyme to noninvasively provide both anatomic and
functional information in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2736635
PMID: 19652086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2009 Oct;20(5):386-92. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328330982e.

Pleiotropic role of growth arrest-specific gene 6 in atherosclerosis.

Tjwa M(1), Moons L, Lutgens E.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz AG Vascular Hematology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Institute of
Cardiovascular Regeneration, University of Frankfurt, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Growth arrest-specific gene 6 (Gas6) belongs to the family of 
vitamin K-dependent coagulation proteins, but in contrast to its other members,
has only a limited role in hemostasis. Instead, Gas6 plays a prominent role in
conditions of injury, inflammation and repair. Gas6 amplifies the activation of
various cell types including endothelial cells and platelets in different models 
of thrombosis and inflammation, processes also important in atherosclerosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recently, we showed that in human and murine atherosclerotic
plaques, Gas6 is expressed by endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells and most
abundantly by macrophages, and that its expression increases with atherosclerosis
severity. Moreover, genetic loss of Gas6 in ApoE mice reduced the influx of
inflammatory cells in the plaque and induced plaque fibrosis, hence creating a
stable plaque phenotype. Consistent herewith, Gas6 plasma levels are increased in
patients with unstable angina pectoris, which is a common consequence of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture.
SUMMARY: Inhibition of Gas6 would be an attractive therapeutic target for
stabilizing atherosclerotic plaques and for the prevention of vascular thrombotic
occlusion after plaque rupture. Here we will critically review the existing
literature on the potential roles of Gas6 and its receptors in the different
stages of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19644365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Jul;7 Suppl 1:328-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03416.x.

Inflammatory mechanisms in atherosclerosis.

Hansson GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Molecular Medicine L8:03, Department of
Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Goran.Hansson@ki.se

Atherosclerosis, the cause of myocardial infarction, stroke and ischemic
gangrene, is an inflammatory disease. When LDL accumulates in the intima, it
activates the endothelium to express leukocyte adhesion molecules and chemokines 
that promote recruitment of monocytes and T cells. Monocyte-derived macrophages
upregulate pattern recognition receptors, including scavenger receptors that
mediate uptake of modified LDL, and Toll-like receptors, which transmit
activating signals leading to release of cytokines, proteases, and vasoactive
molecules. T cells in lesions recognize local antigens and mount Th1 responses
with secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, thus contributing to local
inflammation and growth of the plaque. Intensified inflammatory activation may
lead to local proteolysis, plaque rupture, and thrombus formation, triggering
ischemia and infarction. Inflammatory markers are already used to monitor the
disease process and anti-inflammatory therapy may be useful to control disease
activity.

PMID: 19630827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Aug;13(8B):2713-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00538.x.

Intraplaque injection of Ad5-CMV.p53 aggravates local inflammation and leads to
plaque instability in rabbits.

Zhang L(1), Liu Y, Lu XT, Xu XS, Zhao YX, Ji XP, Zhang PF, Liu CX, Tang MX, Chen 
WQ, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, P.R. China.

This study aims to develop a new animal model of vulnerable plaques and
investigate the potential mechanisms of exogenous p53-induced plaque instability.
Forty rabbits underwent aortic balloon injury, were fed a 1% cholesterol diet for
10 weeks and then normal chow for 6 weeks. Rabbits were divided into
Ad5-CMV.p53-treated group (n = 16), Ad5-CMV.lac Z-treated group (n = 16) and
blank control group (n = 8). Under the guidance of intravascular ultrasound, a
50-microl suspension of adenovirus containing p53 or lac Z was injected into the 
largest plaque of the first two groups, respectively, and these rabbits received 
pharmacological triggering 2 weeks later. In 76.9% of rabbits with p53
transfection, plaque rupture was found, which was significantly (P < 0.05) higher
than that in the Ad5-CMV.lac Z-treated plaques (23.1%), or blank controls plaques
(0%). Increased apoptotic cells, and subsequently, decreased vascular smooth
muscle cells and collagen content, enhanced intima macrophage accumulation,
increased C-reactive protein (CRP) and matrix metalloproteinases staining and
high serum levels of high sensitive CRP (hs-CRP) and monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1) were observed in Ad5-CMV.p53-treated rabbits. However, a binary
logistic regression model revealed that hs-CRP concentration rather than
apoptosis rate played an independent role in plaque rupture with an odds ratio as
1.314 (95% CI: 1.041-1.657, P = 0.021), and there were high positive correlations
between inflammatory biomarkers (hs-CRP or MCP-1) and apoptosis (R(2) = 0.761,
and R(2) = 0.557, respectively, both P < 0.01). Intraplaque injection of p53 gene
provides a safe and effective method for inducing plaque vulnerability in
rabbits. The destabilizing effect of p53 overexpression is mediated mainly
through apoptosis-enhanced inflammation rather than cell apoptosis itself.

PMID: 19602038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2009 Apr-Jun;23(2):65-9.

Chlamydia pneumoniae and atherosclerosis: the role of mast cells.

Di Pietro M(1), Schiavoni G, Del Piano M, Shaik Y, Boscolo P, Caraffa A, Grano M,
Teté S, Conti F, Sessa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Chlamydia pneumoniae (C. pneumoniae), a respiratory pathogen, has been implicated
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, an inflammatory progressive disease,
characterized by the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. Among several types of
inflammatory cells involved in the atherogenesis process, recently particular
attention has been directed toward the mast cells. Experimental studies have
provided several mechanisms by which C. pneumoniae and mast cells could play a
role in all stages of atherosclerosis, from initial inflammatory lesions to
plaque rupture. C. pneumoniae, as well as mast cells, may actively participate
both through the production of cytokines and matrix-degrading metalloproteinases 
and by provoking apoptosis of atheroma-associated vascular cells, key events in
plaque rupture. This mini-review provides a brief overview on adventitial
inflammatory effects of C. pneumoniae and mast cells and their potential role in 
plaque instability. In addition, in this paper we review the role of mast cells
in innate immunity.

PMID: 19589286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Jan 21;146(2):153-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.06.023. Epub 
2009 Jul 3.

Berberine reduces both MMP-9 and EMMPRIN expression through prevention of p38
pathway activation in PMA-induced macrophages.

Huang Z(1), Wang L, Meng S, Wang Y, Chen T, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
Medical School, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, PR China.
susiehzq@yahoo.cn

BACKGROUND: Overproduction of MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases) and EMMPRIN
(extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer) by monocytes/macrophages leads
to atherosclerotic plaque rupture by degrading the extracellular matrix. Serum
MMP-9 levels may therefore represent a novel marker of inflammation in patients
with known coronary artery disease. The purpose of our study was to determine if 
berberine, a natural extract from Rhizoma coptidis, had any effect on the
expression of MMP-9 and EMMPRIN in PMA-induced macrophages.
METHODS: Human monocytic THP-1 cells were pretreated with berberine for 1 h, and 
then induced by PMA for 48 h. Total RNA and protein were collected for Real-time 
PCR and Western blot analysis, respectively. Culture supernatants were collected 
to determine MMP-9 activity.
RESULTS: In the present study, we demonstrated that berberine inhibited the
expression of MMP-9 and EMMPRIN at both the mRNA and protein levels in a
dose-dependent manner in PMA-induced macrophages, and that it also reduced MMP-9 
activity. Furthermore, berberine also suppressed p38 signaling pathway activation
in PMA-induced macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that berberine reduces MMP-9 and EMMPRIN
expression by suppressing the activation of p38 pathway in PMA-induced
macrophages. This suggests a potential role for berberine as a therapeutic aid
for stabilizing atherosclerotic plaque.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19576641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):593-603. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900373.

Pleiotropic roles of S100A12 in coronary atherosclerotic plaque formation and
rupture.

Goyette J(1), Yan WX, Yamen E, Chung YM, Lim SY, Hsu K, Rahimi F, Di Girolamo N, 
Song C, Jessup W, Kockx M, Bobryshev YV, Freedman SB, Geczy CL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Inflammation Research, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia.

Macrophages, cytokines, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) play important roles 
in atherogenesis. The Ca(2+)-binding protein S100A12 regulates monocyte migration
and may contribute to atherosclerosis by inducing proinflammatory cytokines in
macrophages. We found significantly higher S100A12 levels in sera from patients
with coronary artery disease than controls and levels correlated positively with 
C-reactive protein. S100A12 was released into the coronary circulation from
ruptured plaque in acute coronary syndrome, and after mechanical disruption by
percutaneous coronary intervention in stable coronary artery disease. In contrast
to earlier studies, S100A12 did not stimulate proinflammatory cytokine production
by human monocytes or macrophages. Similarly, no induction of MMP genes was found
in macrophages stimulated with S100A12. Because S100A12 binds Zn(2+), we studied 
some functional aspects that could modulate atherogenesis. S100A12 formed a
hexamer in the presence of Zn(2+); a novel Ab was generated that specifically
recognized this complex. By chelating Zn(2+), S100A12 significantly inhibited
MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-3, and the Zn(2+)-induced S100A12 complex colocalized with 
these in foam cells in human atheroma. S100A12 may represent a new marker of this
disease and may protect advanced atherosclerotic lesions from rupture by
inhibiting excessive MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities by sequestering Zn(2+).

PMID: 19542470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Jul 6;124(1):103-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.04.009. Epub 
2009 Apr 11.

Chinese medicine tongxinluo significantly lowers serum lipid levels and
stabilizes vulnerable plaques in a rabbit model.

Chen WQ(1), Zhong L, Zhang L, Ji XP, Zhao YX, Zhang C, Jiang H, Wu YL, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.

RELEVANCE TO ETHNOPHARMACOLOGY: Tongxinluo capsule is a compound preparation
formulated on the basis of the meridian theory of traditional Chinese medicine
and is officially approved for the treatment of angina pectoris and ischemic
stroke in China.OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that the Chinese traditional
medicine tongxinluo in capsule form has similar effects as simvastatin in
lowering serum lipid levels and stabilizing vulnerable plaques.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty New Zealand white rabbits underwent balloon-induced
abdominal aortic endothelial injury and were fed a diet of 1% cholesterol for 8
weeks. The rabbits were then randomly divided into three groups (n=10 each) for
daily doses of tongxinluo capsule (1 g/kg), simvastatin (5 mg/kg) or no drugs for
12 weeks. At the end of week 20, plaque rupture was induced by pharmacological
triggering. Serological, ultrasonographic, pathologic, immunohistochemical, and
gene expression studies were performed.
RESULTS: The incidence of plaque rupture with tongxinluo and simvastatin
treatment was significantly lower than that with control treatment (0% for both
drug treatments vs. 56.0%; P<0.05). Values of serum lipid profile, inflammatory
markers, and pathological and immunohistological assays were significantly
improved in the tongxinluo- and simvastatin-treated groups than in the control
group. The simvastatin-treated group showed lower serum lipid levels than the
tongxinluo-treated group.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with the Chinese medicine tongxinluo was as effective as
simvastatin in lowering serum lipid levels, inhibiting plaque inflammation and
preventing vulnerable plaques from rupture and may provide an alternative therapy
for atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19527824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Curr Drug Targets. 2009 Jun;10(6):513-8.

Toll-like receptors: link between "danger" ligands and plaque instability.

Balogh S(1), Kiss I, Csaszar A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Primary Health Care and University of Szeged, Albert
Szent-Györgyi Clinical Center, Hungary.

Myocardial infarction and stroke are exaggerated by rupture of atherosclerotic
lesions. Rupture-sensitive plaques have a specific composition which renders them
vulnerable, but additional factors (acute infection, higher sympathetic activity,
excessive increase of blood pressure or exposure to a variety of drugs) are
needed to set off the event. Toll-like receptors are important components of the 
innate and adaptive immune system and seem to be a potential link between
inflammation, infectious disease and atherosclerosis. In addition to classical
bacterial and viral antigens, several endogenous ligands (HSP, ox-LDL, apoptotic 
cells) have also been proposed to react to TLRs. There is accumulating evidence
substantiating the contribution of the TLR-signaling pathway not only in the
initiation but also in the progression of atherosclerosis. TLRs also play a key
role in the development of tissue ischemia. Apoptosis and inflammation comprise
two important indicators of plaque instability, and trigger factors augmenting
rapidly TLR signaling can lead to aggravation of plaque-rupture. Due to their
multiplex involvement in ischemic conditions, Toll-like receptors may be a
promising target for therapeutic intervention. In situations such as acute
coronary syndrome, in which inhibition of the inflammatory cascade is warranted, 
the administration of TLR-blocking agents as adjuvant therapy and the clinical
usefulness of this association should be considered.

PMID: 19519353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Aug;29(8):1228-34. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.189761. Epub 2009 Jun 4.

Dickkopf-1 enhances inflammatory interaction between platelets and endothelial
cells and shows increased expression in atherosclerosis.

Ueland T(1), Otterdal K, Lekva T, Halvorsen B, Gabrielsen A, Sandberg WJ,
Paulsson-Berne G, Pedersen TM, Folkersen L, Gullestad L, Oie E, Hansson GK,
Aukrust P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University
Hospital, N-0027 Oslo, Norway. thor.ueland@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Based on the emerging importance of the wingless (Wnt) pathways in
inflammation and vascular biology, we hypothesized a role for Dickkopf-1 (DKK-1),
a major modulator of Wnt signaling, in atherogenesis and plaque destabilization.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report increased levels of DKK-1 in experimental
(ApoE(-/-) mice) and clinical (patients with coronary artery disease [n=80] and
patients with carotid plaque [n=47]) atherosclerosis, both systemically (serum)
and within the lesion, with particularly high levels in advanced and unstable
disease. We identified platelets as an important cellular source of DKK-1 as
shown by in vitro experiments and by immunostaining of thrombus material obtained
at the site of plaque rupture in patients with acute ST-elevation myocardial
infarction, with strong immunoreactivity in platelet aggregates. Our in vitro
experiments identified a role for platelet- and endothelial-derived DKK-1 in
platelet-dependent endothelial activation, promoting enhanced release of
inflammatory cytokines. These inflammatory effects of DKK-1 involved inhibition
of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and activation of nuclear factor kappaB.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify DKK-1 as a novel mediator in platelet-mediated
endothelial cell activation. The demonstration of enhanced DKK-1 expression
within advanced carotid plaques may suggest that this DKK-1-driven inflammatory
loop could be operating within the atherosclerotic lesion.

PMID: 19498175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Jul;29(7):1031-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.165522. Epub 2009 May 21.

Molecular imaging of macrophage cell death for the assessment of plaque
vulnerability.

Laufer EM(1), Winkens MH, Narula J, Hofstra L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.

The ability to identify atherosclerotic plaques that are prone to rupture, also
called vulnerable plaques, may provide a major step forward in the recognition of
patients that have a high risk of developing acute myocardial infarction. Current
clinical risk profiling algorithms, such as the Framingham and Procam risk
scores, have reasonable predictive value in the assessment of the 10 year risk.
These clinical risk profiling scores typically classify patients into low risk
(10-year risk, less than 5%), intermediate risk (5% to 20% risk), and high risk
(greater than 20%). The challenge to imagers is to identify the risk that is
beyond 2% yearly risk. Molecular imaging may help identify plaque inflammation
and apoptosis of inflammatory cells, which are obligatory components of the
plaque instability. These processes offer specific biological targets that can
potentially be exploited to obtain biological information on atherosclerosis
development in the individual patient.

PMID: 19461053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Future Cardiol. 2009 May;5(3):273-84. doi: 10.2217/fca.09.4.

Chemokines as therapeutic targets for atherosclerotic plaque destabilization and 
rupture.

Daissormont IT(1), Kraaijeveld AO, Biessen EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Maastricht University Medical Center, P Debyelaan 25,
Maastricht 6229 HX, The Netherlands. isabelle.daissormont@path.unimaas.nl

Chemokines are instrumental in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis.
Recent advances in genomic technologies and the recognition of atherosclerosis as
an inflammatory disease have given great impetus to studies addressing the
relevance of chemokines for the clinically manifest stages of atherosclerosis and
acute cardiovascular syndromes. In this paper, we will review the current status 
of these studies, highlighting those chemokines that have already been associated
with plaque destabilization and rupture. We will recapitulate recent
epidemiologic, genomic, histopathological and experimental support for the
prominent role of particular chemokines in acute cardiovascular syndromes.
Collectively, these data underpin the potential of chemokines as biomarkers
and/or therapeutic targets, but also expose the lacunae in our understanding of
the precise function of chemokines in the atherosclerosis-related disorders and
in the efficacy of chemokine-targeted clinical trials.

PMID: 19450053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Nov;207(1):59-67. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.04.014. Epub 2009 Apr 17.

Chymase activity is closely related with plaque vulnerability in a hamster model 
of atherosclerosis.

Guo T(1), Chen WQ, Zhang C, Zhao YX, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that stimulation of chymase secretion may
contribute to plaque vulnerability and inhibition of chymase activity may enhance
plaque stability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixty eight-week-old male Syrian golden hamsters were
randomly divided into normal control group, high-cholesterol (HC) treated group, 
HC+ovalbumin treated group and HC+tranilast treated group. The normal control
group received a normal diet while the other three intervention groups received a
high-cholesterol diet for 15 weeks. Hamsters in the HC+ovalbumin treated group
underwent transcatheter pharmacological triggering at the end of week 15 after
antigen sensitization and those in the HC+tranilast treated group were given
tranilast intragastrically for 3 weeks before euthanasia. Serological,
ultrasonographic, pathologic, immunohistochemical, and gene expression studies
were performed in all animals. The total number of mast cells, proportion of
degranulated mast cells and the number of extracellular granules in plaques, the 
apoptosis rate of vascular smooth cells, the local activities of chymase, the
concentration of Ang II and the expression levels of inflammatory markers as well
as plaque vulnerability index all increased significantly in HC+ovalbumin treated
group, but remarkably decreased in HC+tranilast treated group, in comparison with
the HC treated group. These results suggest that stimulation of chymase secretion
contributes to plaque vulnerability while inhibition of chymase activity enhances
plaque stability. We conclude that chymase activity provides a promising
therapeutic target in the stabilization of atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 19446292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2009 Mar;37 Suppl 2:11-6.

[Dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, and vulnerable plaques: the effect of
atorvastatin on atherosclerosis and plaque structure].

[Article in Turkish]

Tokgözoğlu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medicine Faculty of Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey. lalet@hacettepe.edu.tr

Atherosclerotic vascular disease is characterized by inflammation and lipid
accumulation resulting from detrimental effects of several risk factors on
vascular structure, including dyslipidemia. The disease progresses slowly and
insidiously resulting in acute coronary syndromes when the plaque ruptures. The
plaques having a high propensity to rupture are defined as vulnerable. The
vulnerability of the plaque is determined by several factors such as its lipid
content, degree of inflammation, strength of the fibrous cap, degree of
apoptosis, necrosis, and neovascularization. The patient's risk profile and
characteristics are also related to the vulnerability of plaques. The main aim in
preventive cardiology is to prevent the formation of atherosclerotic plaques or
to stabilize the existing plaques to decrease cardiovascular events. Lifestyle
modifications, reduction in risk factors, and some pharmacologic measures can
improve plaque stabilization. Statins contribute to plaque stabilization by their
lipid lowering and pleiotropic effects. Several studies have shown that, with
statin treatment, the plaque becomes more stable, resulting in a decrease in
cardiovascular events. This review summarizes the studies about
plaque-stabilizing effects of atorvastatin.

PMID: 19404045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Aug;29(8):1213-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.189407. Epub 2009 May 14.

Cardiovascular inflammation and lesion cell apoptosis: a novel connection via the
interferon-inducible immunoproteasome.

Yang Z(1), Gagarin D, St Laurent G 3rd, Hammell N, Toma I, Hu CA, Iwasa A,
McCaffrey TA.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, 2300 I Street NW, Ross Hall 541, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Increasing evidence suggests that chronic inflammation contributes to 
atherogenesis, and that acute inflammatory events cause plaque rupture,
thrombosis, and myocardial infarction. The present studies examined how
inflammatory factors, such as interferon-gamma (IFNgamma), cause increased
sensitivity to apoptosis in vascular lesion cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cells from the fibrous cap of human atherosclerotic lesions 
were sensitized by interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) to Fas-induced apoptosis, in a
Bcl-X(L) reversible manner. Microarray profiling identified 72 INFgamma-induced
transcripts with potential relevance to apoptosis. Half could be excluded because
they were induced by IRF-1 overexpression, which did not sensitize to apoptosis. 
IFNgamma treatment strongly reduced Mcl-1, phospho-Bcl-2 (ser70), and
phospho-Bcl-X(L) (ser62) protein levels. Candidate transcripts were modulated by 
siRNA, overexpression, or inhibitors to assess the effect on IFNgamma-induced Fas
sensitivity. Surprisingly, siRNA knockdown of PSMB8 (LMP7), an "immunoproteasome"
component, reversed IFNgamma-induced sensitivity to Fas ligation and prevented
Fas/IFNgamma-induced degradation of Mcl-1, but did not protect p-Bcl-2 or
p-Bcl-X(L). Proteasome inhibition markedly increased Mcl-1, p-Bcl-2, and
p-Bcl-X(L) levels after IFNgamma treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Although critical for antigen presentation, the immunoproteasome
appears to be a key link between inflammatory factors and the control of vascular
cell apoptosis and may thus be an important factor in plaque rupture and
myocardial infarction.

PMCID: PMC2762196
PMID: 19443843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Nucl Med. 2009 Jun;50(6):959-65. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.108.060749. Epub 2009 May 
14.

Quantification of inflammation within rabbit atherosclerotic plaques using the
macrophage-specific CT contrast agent N1177: a comparison with 18F-FDG PET/CT and
histology.

Hyafil F(1), Cornily JC, Rudd JH, Machac J, Feldman LJ, Fayad ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Translational and Molecular Imaging Institute and Imaging Science
Laboratories, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Macrophages play a key role in atherosclerotic plaque rupture. The iodine-based
contrast agent N1177 accumulates in macrophages, allowing for their detection
with CT. In this study, we tested whether the intensity of enhancement detected
with CT in the aortic wall of rabbits injected with N1177 correlated with
inflammatory activity evaluated with (18)F-FDG PET/CT and macrophage density on
histology.METHODS: Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of New
Zealand White rabbits (n = 7) by a repeated balloon injury (4 wk apart) and 4 mo 
of hyperlipemic diet. Noninjured rabbits, fed a chow diet, were used as controls 
(n = 3). A CT scan of the aorta (n = 10) was acquired in each rabbit before,
during, and at 2 h after intravenous injection of N1177 (250 mg of iodine/kg).
One week later, the same rabbits underwent PET/CT 3 h after injection of
(18)F-FDG (37 MBq/kg [1 mCi/kg]). CT enhancement was calculated as the difference
in aortic wall densities between images obtained before and images obtained at 2 
h after injection of N1177. Mean standardized uptake values were measured on PET 
axial slices of the aorta in regions of interest encompassing the vessel wall.
Macrophage density was measured by immunohistology (anti-RAM-11 antibody) on
corresponding aortic cross-sections.
RESULTS: N1177-enhanced CT measured stronger enhancement in the aortic wall of
atherosclerotic rabbits than in control rabbits (10.0 +/- 5.2 vs. 2.0 +/- 2.1
Hounsfield units, respectively; P < 0.05). After the injection of (18)F-FDG, PET 
detected higher standardized uptake values in the aortic wall of atherosclerotic 
rabbits than in control rabbits (0.61 +/- 0.12 vs. 0.21 +/- 0.02; P < 0.05). The 
intensity of enhancement in the aortic wall measured with CT after injection of
N1177 correlated with (18)F-FDG uptake on PET/CT (r = 0.61, P < 0.001) and
macrophage density on immunohistology (r = 0.63, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The intensity of enhancement detected with CT in the aortic wall of
rabbits injected with N1177 correlates with intense uptake of (18)F-FDG measured 
with PET and with macrophage density on histology, suggesting a role for N1177 in
noninvasive identification of high-risk atherosclerotic plaques with CT.

PMID: 19443582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2009 Oct;36(10):1622-8. doi:
10.1007/s00259-009-1152-7. Epub 2009 May 9.

Evaluation and comparison of 11C-choline uptake and calcification in aortic and
common carotid arterial walls with combined PET/CT.

Kato K(1), Schober O, Ikeda M, Schäfers M, Ishigaki T, Kies P, Naganawa S,
Stegger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

PURPOSE: Inflamed atherosclerotic plaques may rupture and cause acute myocardial 
infarction, stroke and other thrombotic events. Early detection of these unstable
plaques could, in many cases, prevent such potentially fatal events. 11C-choline 
or 18F-labelled choline derivatives for visualizing the synthesis of
phospholipids, are promising markers of plaque inflammation with potential
advantages over 18F-FDG. Their potential for plaque characterization in humans
is, however, unclear. In this study the prevalence and distribution of
11C-choline uptake in the aortic and common carotid arterial walls of elderly
male patients was evaluated with combined PET/CT. Additionally, the localization 
of radiotracer uptake and calcification was correlated in various vessel
segments.
METHODS: Image data from 93 consecutive male patients between 60 and 80 years old
who had undergone whole-body 11C-choline PET/CT assessment for prostate cancer
were evaluated retrospectively. 11C-choline uptake and calcification were
analysed qualitatively and semiquantitatively and compared.
RESULTS: 11C-choline uptake was found in 95% of patients, calcification in 94%
throughout all vessel segments. In 6% of the patients radiotracer uptake was
colocalized with calcifications, whereas less than 1% of calcification sites
showed increased radiotracer uptake.
CONCLUSION: Both 11C-choline uptake and calcification in the aortic and common
carotid arterial walls are common in elderly men. Radiotracer uptake and
calcification are, however, only rarely colocalized. 11C-choline has the
potential to provide information about atherosclerotic plaques independent of
calcification measurement.

PMID: 19430785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Semin Immunopathol. 2009 Jun;31(1):79-94. doi: 10.1007/s00281-009-0149-4. Epub
2009 May 5.

CRP and the risk of atherosclerotic events.

Calabrò P(1), Golia E, Yeh ET.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Cardiothoracic Sciences, Second
University of Naples, Monaldi Hospital, Via L. Bianchi, 80131, Naples, Italy.
paolo.calabro@unina2.it

A large body of literature supports the idea that inflammation plays a pivotal
role in all phases of atherosclerosis, from the fatty streak lesion formation to 
the acute coronary event due to vulnerable plaque rupture. Indeed, vascular
inflammation contributes to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, and later in the
disease process, it is a major determinant for the acute coronary syndromes.
There are various inflammatory markers that have been shown to predict
cardiovascular events. These include high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP), a simple downstream marker of inflammation, recently emerged as a major
cardiovascular risk factor. Elevated baseline concentrations of hs-CRP are
associated with the risk of atherosclerotic events in general populations and
show a predictive value even in terms of secondary prevention, both in patients
with chronic stable angina and acute coronary syndromes. In recent year, a lot of
concerns have emerged about the experimental models used to study the role of CRP
in atherosclerosis; moreover, the results of trials evaluating the clinical
association between this molecules and outcome are still controversial. In this
paper, we attempt to review the pathophysiological evidences about the link
between CRP and atherosclerosis and, most notably, about its utility as a marker 
and risk predictor in various clinical settings. The identification of specific
triggers and mechanisms of underlying inflammation and a better understanding of 
each step involved in this complex process might lead to new ways to manage
patients with atherosclerosis, both in terms of primary and secondary prevention,
and CRP still appears to be a suitable candidate for this purpose.

PMID: 19415283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2010 May-Jun;19(3):e61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2009.02.001. 
Epub 2009 Apr 17.

Adventitial lymphocytic inflammation in human coronary arteries with intimal
atherosclerosis.

Tavora F(1), Kutys R, Li L, Ripple M, Fowler D, Burke A.

Author information: 
(1)Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between adventitial inflammation, plaque type, and
culprit plaque morphology in the epicardial arterial circulation has not been
studied in detail.
METHODS: We studied semiserial sections of coronary arteries at autopsy from
patients dying with severe coronary disease, 81 men (age 50 + or - 12 years) and 
13 women (age 52 + or - 13 years). Lesions were classified at 3- to 5-mm segments
according to modified AHA criteria. Adventitial lymphocyte aggregates were
assessed at every 5-mm interval and graded semiquantitatively. Macrophage density
in the adventitial fat and intima was assessed with anti-CD68 staining.
RESULTS: Adventitial lymphocytic inflammation increased with percent stenosis
(P<.0001) and not calcification (P>.2). Hemorrhage into late core, rupture,
erosion, and thin caps all had greater adventitial lymphocytic inflammation
independent of percent stenosis (P<.0001). Peri-adventitial adipose macrophage
density was increased in plaques with atheromas (206 + or - 22 mm(2) vs. 121 + or
- 15 mm(2) in fibrous plaques; P=.02) and correlated positively with adventitial 
lymphocytes (P<.0001) and intimal macrophage content (P<.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Features associated with plaque instability are associated with
significantly greater degrees of adventitial lymphocytic inflammation, both as
lymphocyte aggregates and as adipocyte-derived macrophages. Further study is
required to determine the nature of the association between intimal and
adventitial lymphocytic inflammation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 19375947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Med Hypotheses. 2009 Aug;73(2):153-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2009.03.011. Epub 2009 
Apr 16.

Everolimus, a promising medical therapy for coronary heart disease?

Jia L(1), Hui RT.

Author information: 
(1)Hypertension Division, Fuwai Hospital and Cardiovascular Institute, 167
Beilishilu, Beijing 100037, PR China.

Coronary heart disease is mainly caused by atherosclerosis, which is a
multifactorial and systemic disease. Lipid metabolism disorder and chronic
inflammation are two well accepted mechanisms leading to atherosclerosis. The key
initiating process in athrogenesis is lipid retention in subendothelium.
Inflammatory activity plays an important role in the whole pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis. Recent investigations have demonstrated that rapamycin reduces
lipid retention by increasing adipose-tissue lipase activity and decreasing
lipoprotein lipase activity. Rapamycin also reduce intracellular lipid
accumulation in smooth muscle cells and macrophages. Since rapamycin is a
definite immunosuppressive agent, and inflammatory process has been involved in
atherosclerosis, the compound would have effect on the progression of
atherosclerosis through reducing inflammatory activity. Moreover, rapamycin would
protect plaque from rupture by selectively clearing macrophages without affecting
vascular smooth muscle cells. Even some in vivo studies demonstrate that
rapamycin can notably inhibit the development of atherosclerosis. Rapamycin,
especially its analog, everolimus, is a non-toxic, well-tolerated drug suitable
for long term use. Clinical experiments demonstrate that everolimus can reduce
graft vasculopathy in heart transplant patients. Therefore, we propose that
everolimus administered systemically is a promising medical therapy to attenuate 
atherosclerosis and prevent further adverse events. In addition, rapamycin is a
selective and effective mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor. mTOR acts
as a hub for cell metabolism, cell growth and cell survival. Based on previous
evidences, we hypotheses that mTOR signaling pathway could play a significant
role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19375241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Jun 24;613(1-3):79-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.03.075.
Epub 2009 Apr 6.

Effect of metoprolol on vulnerable plaque in rabbits by changing shear stress
around plaque and reducing inflammation.

Liang C(1), Xiaonan L, Xiaojun C, Changjiang L, Xinsheng X, Guihua J, Xiaobo H,
Yanen Z, Runyi S, Huixia L, Yun Z, Mei Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Public Health, Shandong University 
Qilu Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, PR China.

The beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are known to reduce cardiovascular events, but 
less is known about their effects on vulnerable plaque. The purpose of this study
is to explore the role of metoprolol on vulnerable plaque and the possible
mechanism. Vulnerable plaque model was established by local transfection with p53
gene in New Zealand Rabbits. Metoprolol treatment attenuated vessel positive
remodeling and reduced vulnerability index (1.61+/-0.58 vs. 2.33+/-0.12, P<0.01).
Although the difference did not reach statistical significance, the rate of
rupture of atherosclerotic plaque (31% vs. 75%) and intima-media thickness
(0.05+/-0.01 vs. 0.08+/-0.01 cm) were less in the metoprolol group than in the
control group. The level of shear stress-related inflammatory cytokines such as
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), vascular adhesion molecule 1
(VCAM-1), matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1), were lower in the metoprolol group 
than in the control group (P<0.01). Compared with control group, total
cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol were lower (P<0.01) in the
metoprolol group. After metoprolol treatment, shear stress increased, and was not
different to baseline (physiological shear stress, P>0.05). Shear stress and
vulnerability index showed a negative correlation. These findings suggest that
metoprolol could inhibit the development of atherosclerosis and stabilize
vulnerable plaque by regulation of lipid and reduction of inflammation, in which 
the change from low shear stress to physiological shear stress around plaque may 
play an important role.

PMID: 19356726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Clin Lipidol. 2009 Apr;3(2):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2009.01.004. Epub 2009
Jan 29.

The role of lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 on cardiovascular disease
risk assessment and plaque rupture: a clinical review.

Reddy KJ(1), Singh M, Bangit JR, Batsell RR.

Author information: 
(1)Reddy Cardiac Wellness, 3519 Town Center Blvd, Sugar Land, TX 77479 USA.

During the last several last decades, reduction in lipids has been the main focus
to decrease the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). Several lines of evidence, 
however, have indicated that lipids account only for the <50% of variability in
cardiovascular risk in the United States. Therefore, for better identification of
people at high cardiovascular risk, a more effective and complete approach is
required. Our understanding of atherosclerosis has shifted from a focal disease
resulting in symptoms caused by severe stenosis to a systemic disease
distinguished by plaque inflammation with a potential to rupture and thrombosis, 
turning a substenotic atherosclerotic lesion into a complete occlusive lesion.
Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2) (Lp-PLA(2)) is a novel inflammatory
biomarker that can provide much needed information about plaque inflammation and 
plaque stability. Lp-PLA(2) is among the multiple biomarkers that have been
associated with increased CHD risk. In this present work, we review the evidence 
from previous studies addressing the effect of different therapies on decreasing 
Lp-PLA(2) and the role of direct Lp-PLA(2) inhibitors. This work also briefly
reviews the evidence of Lp-PLA(2) clinical utility as a potential marker of
vascular inflammation and formation of rupture prone plaques. Additionally, we
also discuss the implication of available evidence in context of current
cardiovascular inflammatory biomarkers recommendations and the evidence from
epidemiologic studies addressing the relationship of Lp-PLA(2) and risk of
cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 21291797  [PubMed]


328. J Pathol. 2009 May;218(1):7-29. doi: 10.1002/path.2518.

Novel concepts in atherogenesis: angiogenesis and hypoxia in atherosclerosis.

Sluimer JC(1), Daemen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht University Medical Centre, Department of Pathology, Cardiovascular 
Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The clinical complications of atherosclerosis are caused by thrombus formation,
which in turn results from rupture of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque. The
formation of microvessels (angiogenesis) in an atherosclerotic plaque contributes
to the development of plaques, increasing the risk of rupture. Microvessel
content increases with human plaque progression and is likely stimulated by
plaque hypoxia, reactive oxygen species and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)
signalling. The presence of plaque hypoxia is primarily determined by plaque
inflammation (increasing oxygen demand), while the contribution of plaque
thickness (reducing oxygen supply) seems to be minor. Inflammation and hypoxia
are almost interchangeable and both stimuli may initiate HIF-driven angiogenesis 
in atherosclerosis. Despite the scarcity of microvessels in animal models,
atherogenesis is not limited in these models. This suggests that abundant plaque 
angiogenesis is not a requirement for atherogenesis and may be a physiological
response to the pathophysiological state of the arterial wall. However, the
destruction of the integrity of microvessel endothelium likely leads to
intraplaque haemorrhage and plaques at increased risk for rupture. Although a
causal relation between the compromised microvessel structure and atherogenesis
or between angiogenic stimuli and plaque angiogenesis remains tentative, both
plaque angiogenesis and plaque hypoxia represent novel targets for non-invasive
imaging of plaques at risk for rupture, potentially permitting early diagnosis
and/or risk prediction of patients with atherosclerosis in the near future.

PMID: 19309025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Jul;29(7):1009-16. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.165563. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Inflammation imaging in atherosclerosis.

Rudd JH(1), Hyafil F, Fayad ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Cambridge University, UK. jhfr2@cam.ac.uk

Inflammation is important at many stages of atherosclerotic plaque development.
We highlight several imaging modalities that can quantify the degree of plaque
inflammation noninvasively. Imaging of this type might allow testing of novel
antiatherosclerosis drugs, identification of patients at risk of plaque rupture, 
and deeper insight into the biology of the disease. The imaging modalities are
discussed in relation to their potential use in these areas.

PMCID: PMC2836586
PMID: 19304673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Oct;206(2):355-61. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.02.014. Epub 2009 Feb 21.

Statin prevents plaque disruption in apoE-knockout mouse model through
pleiotropic effect on acute inflammation.

Nakamura K(1), Sasaki T, Cheng XW, Iguchi A, Sato K, Kuzuya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsuruma-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2009 Oct;206(2):351-2; author reply 353-4.

Although it has been demonstrated that statins stabilize atherosclerotic lesions 
in animal models of advanced atherosclerosis, there is little evidence to suggest
that statins have a preventive effect on plaque rupture itself. In the present
study, we examined the effect of fluvastatin on plaque disruption using a simple 
and quick method of plaque disruption in carotid artery lesions in apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice. Male apolipoprotein E-deficient mice received normal chow and
underwent ligation of the left common carotid artery just proximal to its
bifurcation. Four weeks later, a polyethylene cuff was placed around the artery
immediately proximal to the ligation site. Fluvastatin (10mg/kg per day) was
given by oral gavage every day starting at 3 days before cuff placement. The
administration of fluvastatin suppressed atherosclerotic plaque disruption
accompanied by luminal thrombi by 31.5% compared with controls at 4 days after
the cuff was placed at the ligated carotid artery. Fluvastatin administration
decreased matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression, gelatinolytic activity,
endothelial adhesion molecules expression and neutrophil infiltration, and
increased type I collagen content in the cuffed region. In summary, fluvastatin
was found to prevent plaque disruption through pleiotropic effect on acute
inflammation in an animal model using apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.

PMID: 19296953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Oct;206(2):335-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.01.041. Epub 2009 Feb 7.

Association of inflammatory markers with angiographic severity and extent of
coronary artery disease.

Drakopoulou M(1), Toutouzas K, Stefanadi E, Tsiamis E, Tousoulis D, Stefanadis C.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Cardiology, Medical School of Athens University,
Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece.

Inflammatory processes play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
and mediate many of the stages of atheroma development, from initial leukocyte
recruitment to eventual rupture of the unstable atherosclerotic plaque. Several
systemic inflammatory markers reflect different degrees of inflammation and have 
been indicated as independent risk factors in cardiovascular disease, especially 
in unstable coronary syndromes. However, whether elevated levels of circulating
inflammatory markers play a role in the extent and severity of atherosclerosis
remains controversial. The present review summarizes our current understanding of
the relationship between inflammatory markers and the presence and extent of
coronary atherosclerosis, in order to assess the potential utility of these
markers in identifying patients with higher levels of atherosclerotic burden.

PMID: 19264307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009 Sep;11(9):2333-9. doi: 10.1089/ARS.2009.2469.

Macrophage apoptosis in atherosclerosis: consequences on plaque progression and
the role of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Tabas I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
iat1@columbia.edu

Atherothrombotic vascular diseases, such as myocardial infarction and stroke, are
the leading causes of death in the industrialized world. The immediate cause of
these diseases is acute occlusive thrombosis in medium-sized arteries feeding
critical organs. Thrombosis is triggered by the rupture or erosion of a minority 
of atherosclerotic plaques that have advanced to a particular stage of
"vulnerability." Vulnerable plaques are characterized by certain key features,
such as inflammation, thinning of a protective collagenous cap, and a lipid-rich 
necrotic core consisting of macrophage debris. A number of cellular events
contribute to vulnerable plaque formation, including secretion of
pro-inflammatory, procoagulant, and proteolytic molecules by macrophages as well 
as the death of macrophages, intimal smooth muscles cells, and possibly
endothelial cells. The necrotic core in particular is a key factor in plaque
vulnerability, because macrophage debris promotes inflammation, plaque
instability, and thrombosis. Plaque necrosis arises from a combination of
lesional macrophage apoptosis and defective clearance of these dead cells, a
process called efferocytosis. This review focuses on how macrophage apoptosis, in
the setting of defective efferocytosis, contributes to necrotic core formation
and how a process known to be prominent in advanced lesions--activation of ER
stress signal-transduction pathways--contributes to macrophage apoptosis in these
plaques.

PMCID: PMC2787884
PMID: 19243235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Mar;156(6):941-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2008.00102.x.

Oral rapamycin attenuates inflammation and enhances stability of atherosclerotic 
plaques in rabbits independent of serum lipid levels.

Chen WQ(1), Zhong L, Zhang L, Ji XP, Zhang M, Zhao YX, Zhang C, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture and thrombosis are the
main cause of acute coronary syndrome. The study was aimed to test the hypothesis
that oral administration of rapamycin may attenuate inflammation, inhibit
progression and enhance stability of atherosclerotic plaques.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Thirty New Zealand rabbits were subjected to
balloon-induced endothelial injury of the abdominal aorta and were fed a diet of 
1% cholesterol for 20 weeks. From week 9 to week 20, the animals were treated
with oral rapamycin (0.5 mg x kg(-1) x day(-1); group A), oral simvastatin (5 mg 
x kg(-1) x day(-1); group B) and no drugs (group C). At the end of week 20, all
rabbits were challenged with injection of Chinese Russell's viper venom and
histamine. Serological, ultrasonographic, pathological, immunohistochemical and
gene expression studies were performed.
KEY RESULTS: Rapamycin significantly increased the thickness of the fibrous caps 
and decreased plaque vulnerability index in group A rabbits. Serum lipid levels
were higher whereas plaque burden was lower in group A than in group B (P <
0.05). The incidence of plaque rupture in group A (0%) and group B (0%) was
significantly lower than that in group C (56.0%, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Oral administration of rapamycin effectively
attenuated inflammation, inhibited progression and enhanced stability of
atherosclerotic plaques in rabbits, without altering serum lipid levels. Our
findings suggest a novel approach to the treatment of atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC2697718
PMID: 19239473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):304-17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.188318.

Autophagy in atherosclerosis: a cell survival and death phenomenon with
therapeutic potential.

Martinet W(1), De Meyer GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 
Antwerp, Belgium. wim.martinet@ua.ac.be

Autophagy is a reparative, life-sustaining process by which cytoplasmic
components are sequestered in double-membrane vesicles and degraded on fusion
with lysosomal compartments. A growing body of evidence suggests that autophagy
is stimulated in advanced atherosclerotic plaques by oxidized lipids,
inflammation, and metabolic stress conditions. However, despite the increasing
interest in autophagy in various pathophysiological situations such as
neurodegeneration, cancer, and cardiac myopathies, the process remains an
underestimated and overlooked phenomenon in atherosclerosis. As a consequence,
its role in plaque formation and stability is poorly understood. Most likely,
autophagy safeguards plaque cells against cellular distress, in particular
oxidative injury, by degrading damaged intracellular material. In this way,
autophagy is antiapoptotic and contributes to cellular recovery in an adverse
environment. An interesting observation is that basal autophagy can be
intensified by specific drugs. Excessively stimulated autophagic activity is
capable of destroying major proportions of the cytosol, leading finally to type
II programmed cell death that lacks several hallmarks of apoptosis or necrosis.
Because atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disorder of the arterial intima,
pharmacological approaches could be developed to stabilize vulnerable,
rupture-prone lesions through selective induction of macrophage autophagic death.

PMID: 19213965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2009 Feb;53(1):26-34.

PET and SPECT imaging of apoptosis in vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques with
radiolabeled Annexin A5.

Laufer EM(1), Winkens HM, Corsten MF, Reutelingsperger CP, Narula J, Hofstra L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
The Netherlands. l.hofstra@cardio.unimaas.nl

Atherosclerosis still represents killer number one in industrialized nations, and
is starting to have increased impact in developing countries. Atherosclerotic
plaques are the net result of a complex interplay between vascular cholesterol
deposition, inflammatory activity and extracellular matrix formation. The result 
is luminal narrowing of arteries, which may ultimately lead to compromised blood 
flow to essential body organs, most notoriously to the heart. Most of the
cardiovascular events that are caused by atherosclerosis, such as acute
myocardial infarction or stroke, are the result of a transition of so-called
stable atherosclerotic plaques to vulnerable plaques, that are prone to rupture. 
The direct consequence of atherosclerotic plaque rupture is exposure of
thrombogenic plaque constituents to the blood, leading to instant local thrombus 
formation. The formation of this localized thrombus may ultimately result in
sudden obstruction of blood flow and consequent infarction of distal tissue.
Clinical risk profiling methods, such as the Framingham and Procam risk scores,
are reasonable predictors of myocardial infarction over a 10-year time-span.
However, the challenge remains to identify those patients with a very high risk
of suffering from myocardial infarction in the coming months. Imaging may provide
the necessary diagnostic information to identify such individuals. The transition
of stable atherosclerotic plaques to vulnerable plaques is typically heralded by 
inflammation, thinning of the overlying fibrous cap, and the presence of a large 
necrotic core. Apoptosis is linked to all of these features of plaque
vulnerability, and may, therefore, provide uniquely useful targets for the
identification of plaque vulnerability. In recent years, a number of molecular
imaging technologies have been developed to image apoptosis, which will be
discussed in this review. Further development of apoptosis imaging technologies
may aid us in the years to come in the quest to identify patients with critical
cardiovascular risks, to treat myocardial infarction in its imminent, instead of 
its evident phase.

PMID: 19182725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Sep;1793(9):1485-95. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.12.011. Epub 2008 Dec 29.

Autophagy in the cardiovascular system.

De Meyer GR(1), Martinet W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 
Antwerp, Belgium. guido.demeyer@ua.ac.be

Autophagy is a catabolic pathway for bulk turnover of long-lived proteins and
organelles via lysosomal degradation. Growing evidence reveals that autophagy is 
involved in the progression or prevention of many human diseases. Here we discuss
the role of autophagy in the normal heart, in heart disease and atherosclerosis. 
In the heart, autophagy functions predominantly as a pro-survival pathway during 
cellular stress by removing protein aggregates and damaged organelles, protecting
the heart against famine, excessive beta-adrenergic stimulation and ischemia.
However, when severely triggered, e.g. during reperfusion, the autophagic
machinery may lead to cell death. Furthermore, autophagy modulates cardiac
hypertrophy and the transition from hypertrophy to heart failure. During aging,
lipofuscin is formed via autophagy in the heart and impairs autophagy. Basal
autophagy in atherosclerotic plaques is a survival mechanism safeguarding plaque 
cells against cellular distress, in particular oxidative injury, metabolic stress
and inflammation, by removing harmful oxidatively modified proteins and damaged
components. Hence, autophagy is anti-apoptotic and contributes to cellular
recovery in an adverse environment. However, excessively stimulated autophagy
causes autophagic death in plaque cells and is detrimental. Ceroid that is formed
via autophagy in atherosclerotic arteries impairs autophagy and induces
apoptosis. Basal autophagy can be intensified by appropriate drugs and
pharmacological approaches have been developed to stabilize rupture-prone plaques
through selective induction of macrophage autophagic death, without affecting the
plaque stabilizing smooth muscle cells.

PMID: 19152812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Vasc Med. 2009 Feb;14(1):73-89. doi: 10.1177/1358863X08094801.

Collagens in the progression and complications of atherosclerosis.

Adiguzel E(1), Ahmad PJ, Franco C, Bendeck MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Collagens constitute a major portion of the extracellular matrix in the
atherosclerotic plaque, where they contribute to the strength and integrity of
the fibrous cap, and also modulate cellular responses via specific receptors and 
signaling pathways. This review focuses on the diverse roles that collagens play 
in atherosclerosis; regulating the infiltration and differentiation of smooth
muscle cells and macrophages; controlling matrix remodeling through feedback
signaling to proteinases; and influencing the development of atherosclerotic
complications such as plaque rupture, aneurysm formation and calcification.
Expanding our understanding of the pathways involved in cell-matrix interactions 
will provide new therapeutic targets and strategies for the diagnosis and
treatment of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19144782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Am J Pathol. 2009 Feb;174(2):693-700. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080561. Epub 2009 
Jan 8.

T-cell activation leads to reduced collagen maturation in atherosclerotic plaques
of Apoe(-/-) mice.

Ovchinnikova O(1), Robertson AK, Wågsäter D, Folco EJ, Hyry M, Myllyharju J,
Eriksson P, Libby P, Hansson GK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Rupture of the collagenous, fibrous cap of an atherosclerotic plaque commonly
causes thrombosis. Activated immune cells can secrete mediators that jeopardize
the integrity of the fibrous cap. This study aimed to determine the relationship 
between T-cell-mediated inflammation and collagen turnover in a mouse model of
experimental atherosclerosis. Both Apoe(-/-) x CD4dnTbetaRII mice with defective 
transforming growth factor-beta receptors in T cells (and hence released from
tonic suppression of T-cell activation) and lesion size-matched Apoe(-/-) mice
were used. Picrosirius red staining showed a lower content of thick mature
collagen fibers in lesions of Apoe(-/-) x CD4dnTbetaRII mice, although both
groups had similar levels of procollagen type I or III mRNA and total collagen
content in lesions. Analysis of both gene expression and protein content showed a
significant decrease of lysyl oxidase, the extracellular enzyme needed for
collagen cross-linking, in aortas of Apoe(-/-)--CD4dnTbetaRII mice. T-cell-driven
inflammation provoked a selective and limited increase in the expression of
proteinases that catabolize the extracellular matrix. Atheromata of
Apoe(-/-)--CD4dnTbetaRII mice had increased levels of matrix metalloproteinase-13
and cathepsin S mRNAs and of the active form of cathepsin S protein but no
increase was detected in collagen fragmentation. Our results suggest that
exaggerated T-cell-driven inflammation limits collagen maturation in the
atherosclerotic plaque while having little effect on collagen degradation.

PMCID: PMC2630576
PMID: 19131590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Med. 2009 Jan;122(1 Suppl):S3-S14. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.10.013.

The pathology of atherosclerosis: plaque development and plaque responses to
medical treatment.

Insull W Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Atherosclerosis and Vascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, and 
Lipid Research Clinic, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030-3411,
USA. winsull@bcm.edu

Atherosclerosis develops over the course of 50 years, beginning in the early
teenage years. The causes of this process appear to be lipid retention,
oxidation, and modification, which provoke chronic inflammation at susceptible
sites in the walls of all major conduit arteries. Initial fatty streaks evolve
into fibrous plaques, some of which develop into forms that are vulnerable to
rupture, causing thrombosis or stenosis. Erosion of the surfaces of some plaques 
and rupture of a plaque's calcific nodule into the artery lumen also may trigger 
thrombosis. The process of plaque development is the same regardless of
race/ethnicity, sex, or geographic location, apparently worldwide. However, the
rate of development is faster in patients with risk factors such as hypertension,
tobacco smoking, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and genetic predisposition. Clinical
trial data demonstrate that treatment with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A 
reductase inhibitors (statins) favorably alters plaque size, cellular
composition, chemical composition, and biological activities centered on
inflammation and cholesterol metabolism, as well as the risk of clinical events
due to atherosclerosis. Even with advanced atherosclerosis, statins begin to
improve clinical risk within 4 months. During long-term follow-up in clinical
trials for up to 11 years with or without further treatment, clinical benefit
remains significant, indicating the durability of treatment-induced changes in
the development of plaque. Thus, atherosclerosis, a disease heretofore viewed as 
inevitably progressive, can be treated to significantly alter arterial lesions
and reduce their clinical consequences.

PMID: 19110086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2009 Jan;11(1):12-20.

Inflammatory markers and stroke.

Elkind MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 
710 West 168th Street, Box 182, New York, NY 10032, USA. mse13@columbia.edu

Basic and animal research implicate inflammatory mechanisms in the pathogenesis
and progression of atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, thrombosis, and stroke.
Inflammatory biomarkers, particularly high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2, have been identified as potential
predictors of stroke risk and prognosis. Infections may also precipitate stroke. 
Medications, especially hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors
(statins), reduce inflammatory marker levels independently of lipid effects, and 
the ability of statins to reduce coronary events and stroke correlates with their
effect on inflammatory biomarkers. Vaccination against influenza may also reduce 
stroke risk. Determining whether reduction of biomarkers reduces risk of
recurrent stroke, however, requires further study before inflammatory markers
become a routine part of the evaluation of stroke patients.

PMID: 19091170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Infect Immun. 2009 Feb;77(2):867-76. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00566-08. Epub 2008 Dec 1.

Host cell cytokines induced by Chlamydia pneumoniae decrease the expression of
interstitial collagens and fibronectin in fibroblasts.

Baumert J(1), Schmidt KH, Eitner A, Straube E, Rödel J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena,
D-07740 Jena, Germany.

Chlamydia pneumoniae infection has been associated with chronic obstructive
airway disease (COPD), asthma, and atherosclerosis. Inflammation and airway
remodeling in asthma and COPD result in subepithelial fibrosis that is
characterized by the deposition of interstitial collagens and fibronectin. The
progression of atherosclerosis is also accompanied by an increased production of 
interstitial collagens in the intima. As shown by reverse transcription-PCR and
immunoblotting, infection of human fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells by C.
pneumoniae TW-183 downregulated the expression of type I and III collagen and
fibronectin, whereas the level of type IV collagen remained unchanged.
Conditioned medium from infected fibroblasts as well as epithelial WISH cells
also reduced the expression of interstitial collagens and fibronectin in
uninfected cells. In experiments using blocking antibodies, beta interferon was
found to contribute to the inhibitory effects of conditioned medium collected
from infected fibroblasts. In contrast, downregulation of matrix protein
expression by conditioned medium from epithelial cells was caused by
interleukin-1alpha, which was not secreted from fibroblasts following chlamydial 
infection. C. pneumoniae-mediated inhibition of collagen and fibronectin
expression was diminished following transfection of fibroblasts with specific
small interfering RNA targeting the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta. The downregulation of interstitial collagens and fibronectin by the
Chlamydia-induced host cell cytokine response may modulate tissue remodeling
processes in airway diseases. In atherosclerosis the inhibition of collagen
synthesis by C. pneumoniae infection may promote plaque vulnerability, thereby
increasing the risk of plaque rupture.

PMCID: PMC2632053
PMID: 19047405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Jan;202(1):2-10. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.08.039. Epub 2008 Sep 6.

Atherosclerosis--an immune disease: The Anitschkov Lecture 2007.

Hansson GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Goran.Hansson@ki.se

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease. This article reviews the emergence of
this concept from studies of patients and their lesions, experimental animal
models, and epidemiological cohorts. Immunohistochemical studies identified
immune cells and mediators and provided evidence for inflammatory activation in
the atherosclerotic lesion. In parallel, cell culture studies demonstrated the
capacity of vascular cells to interact with immune cells. Subsequent studies of
clinical and epidemiological materials have identified inflammatory markers and
immunoregulatory genes as contributors of risk for myocardial infarction and
stroke. Finally, experiments using gene-targeted mice have provided mechanistic
understanding of the disease process. It is now thought that the atherosclerotic 
process is initiated when low-density lipoproteins accumulate in the intima,
activate the endothelium, and promote recruitment of monocytes and T cells.
Monocytes differentiate into macrophages, internalize modified lipoproteins, and 
end up as foam cells. T cells in lesions recognize local antigens and mount T
helper-1 responses that contribute to local inflammation and plaque growth. This 
atherogenic pathway is counterbalanced by anti-inflammatory signals provided by
regulatory immunity. Intensified inflammatory activation may lead to local
proteolysis, plaque rupture, thrombus formation, ischemia and infarction. Novel
therapeutic opportunities may emerge from understanding the role of inflammation 
in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18951547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2009 Feb;23(1):31-40. doi: 10.1007/s10557-008-6147-2. Epub
2008 Oct 24.

Inflammation and plaque vulnerability.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Heart
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Suite 5531 8700 Beverly Blvd, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA. shahp@cshs.org

Development of a thrombus at the site of an atherosclerotic plaque initiates
abrupt arterial occlusion and is the proximate event responsible for the vast
majority of acute ischemic syndromes. In nearly 75% of cases thrombus overlies a 
disrupted or ruptured plaque whereas the remainder of the thrombi overly an
intact plaque with superficial endothelial erosion. Over the past several years, 
it has been recognized that plaque composition rather than plaque size or
stenosis severity is important for plaque rupture and subsequent thrombosis.
Ruptured plaques, and by inference, plaques prone to rupture, tend to be large in
size with associated expansive arterial remodeling, thin fibrous cap with a thick
or large necrotic lipid core with immuno-inflammatory cell infiltration in
fibrous cap and adventitia and increased plaque neovascularity and intraplaque
hemorrhage. The size of the necrotic lipid core and extent and location of plaque
inflammation appear to be key factors in determining plaque instability.
Inflammation and immune cell activation appears to play a key role in the loss of
collagen in the fibrous cap, a prelude to fibrous cap rupture, through release of
collagen degrading enzymes. Furthermore, inflammation may also play a key role in
the death of collagen synthesizing smooth muscle cells which further contributes 
to loss of fibrous cap integrity. Inflammation also is likely a key player in the
ensuing thrombosis that follows plaque disruption through the elaboration of the 
pro-coagulant protein, tissue factor. An improved understanding of the
pathophysiology of plaque vulnerability and subsequent athero-thrombosis should
provide novel insights into improved prevention of athero-thrombotic
cardiovascular events.

PMID: 18949542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Arch Cardiol Mex. 2007 Oct-Dec;77 Suppl 4:S4-16-22.

[Inflammation and plaque instability].

[Article in Spanish]

Malpartida F(1), Vivancos R, Urbano C, Mora J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya, Málaga, 
España.

The mechanisms that regulate the stability of the atheroma plaque are a new focus
of interest to understand the pathophysiology of acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
and its therapy. Up to 75% of ACS are clinical expression of an unstable plaque
rupture. The identification of unstable or so called vulnerable plaque (VP)
became an interesting target, since they are the substrate of eventual future
events. The VP determinant factors are: the size and consistence of lipid core,
thickness of fibrous cap around this core, and the balance inflammation-
reparation inside this cap. Inflammation plays a starring role in every single
atherosclerosis stage. High sensitivity C - reactive protein (hs-CRP) is one of
the most used markers of inflammation. We determined hs-CRP in 104 patients. The 
elevation of this marker was 5.85 mg/L in stable angina, 19.92 in non ST
elevation ACS, and 50.41 mg/L in whom that presented ACS with ST elevation. (p < 
0.01). The majority of coronary occlusion occurs in previously non-significant (<
70%) angiographic stenosis. Therefore, the current challenge is to identify and
treat VP using whether invasive or non-invasive methods. This lead to a new
concept: the "vulnerable patient". Using these new diagnostic techniques, along
with the information obtained from clinical trials in course, we should be able
to prevent future coronary events.

PMID: 18938692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2008;66(3):184-7.

Premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and systemic lupus erythematosus
from bedside to bench.

Von Feldt JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. vonfeldt@mail.med.upenn.edu

Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in SLE is increased in patient with
established disease, and SLE itself has been determined to be an independent risk
factor for cardiovascular events. Autopsy studies have demonstrated that the
coronary vessels of SLE patients have atherosclerotic plaque, and most
cardiovascular events are not attributable to active vasculitis. It is believed
that patients with inflammatory disease, including SLE, are more likely to have
vulnerable plaque rupture, accounting for more frequent events. Elevated
homocysteine levels have been associated with the presence and progression of
atherosclerotic plaque. Enzyme polymorphisms involved in the folatehomocysteine
pathway do not seem to contribute to differences in homocysteine concentration or
atherosclerotic plaque. Recently, endothelial dysfunction has been identified as 
an early abnormality in ASCVD, and has been demonstrated in the vessels of SLE
patients. Premature cardiovascular disease in SLE patients is likely attributable
to the consequences of inflammation. There is preliminary evidence that type I
interferons maybe the initial stimulation of the cascade of atherosclerotic
development, starting with endothelial damage, and abnormal vascular repair.

PMID: 18937629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Nov 1;314(18):3405-14. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.09.002. Epub 
2008 Sep 18.

Matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene regulation by a PPAR alpha agonist in human
monocyte-derived macrophages.

Souissi IJ(1), Billiet L, Cuaz-Pérolin C, Slimane MN, Rouis M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory on Atherosclerotic Biological and Genetic Factors, Faculty
of Medicine, Monastir TN-5019, Tunisia.

MMP-12, a macrophage-specific matrix metalloproteinase with large substrate
specificity, has been reported to be highly expressed in mice, rabbits and human 
atherosclerotic lesions. Increased MMP-12 from inflammatory macrophages is
associated with several degenerative diseases such as atherosclerosis. In this
manuscript, we show that IL-1beta, a proinflammatory cytokine found in
atherosclerotic plaques, increases both mRNA and protein levels of MMP-12 in
human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM). Since peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), such as PPARalpha and PPARgamma, are
expressed in macrophages and because PPAR activation exerts an anti-inflammatory 
effect on vascular cells, we have investigated the effect of PPARalpha and gamma 
isoforms on MMP-12 regulation in HMDM. Our results show that MMP-12 expression
(mRNA and protein) is down regulated in IL-1beta-treated macrophages only in the 
presence of a specific PPARalpha agonist, GW647, in a dose-dependent manner. In
contrast, this inhibitory effect was abolished in IL-1beta-stimulated peritoneal 
macrophages isolated from PPARalpha(-/-) mice and treated with the PPARalpha
agonist, GW647. Moreover, reporter gene transfection experiments using different 
MMP-12 promoter constructs showed a reduction of the promoter activities by
approximately 50% in IL-1beta-stimulated PPARalpha-pre-treated cells. However,
MMP-12 promoter analysis did not reveal the presence of a PPRE response element. 
The IL-1beta effect is known to be mediated through the AP-1 binding site.
Mutation of the AP-1 site, located at -81 in the MMP-12 promoter region relative 
to the transcription start site, followed by transfection analysis, gel shift and
ChIP experiments revealed that the inhibitory effect was the consequence of the
protein-protein interaction between GW 647-activated PPARalpha and c-Fos or c-Jun
transcription factors, leading to inhibition of their binding to the AP-1 motif. 
These studies suggest that PPARalpha agonists may be used therapeutically, not
only for lipid disorders, but also to prevent inflammation and atheromatous
plaque rupture, where their ability to inhibit MMP-12 expression in HMDM may be
beneficial.

PMID: 18823978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Sci (Lond). 2009 Mar;116(5):423-31. doi: 10.1042/CS20080155.

Angiotensin II modulates CD40 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Souza HP(1), Frediani D, Cobra AL, Moretti AI, Jurado MC, Fernandes TR, Cardounel
AJ, Zweier JL, Tostes RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil. heraldo@emercli.fm.usp.br

The signalling pathway CD40/CD40L (CD40 ligand) plays an important role in
atherosclerotic plaque formation and rupture. AngII (angiotensin II), which
induces oxidative stress and inflammation, is also implicated in the progression 
of atherosclerosis. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that AngII
increases CD40/CD40L activity in vascular cells and that ROS (reactive oxygen
species) are part of the signalling cascade that controls CD40/CD40L expression. 
Human CASMCs (coronary artery smooth muscle cells) in culture exposed to IL
(interleukin)-1beta or TNF-alpha (tumour necrosis factor-alpha) had increased
superoxide generation and enhanced CD40 expression, detected by EPR (electron
paramagnetic resonance) and immunoblotting respectively. Both phenomena were
abolished by previous incubation with membrane-permeant antioxidants or cell
transfection with p22(phox)antisense. AngII (50-200 nmol/l) induced an early and 
sustained increase in CD40 mRNA and protein expression in CASMCs, which was
blocked by treatment with antioxidants. Increased CD40 expression led to enhanced
activity of the pathway, as AngII-treated cells stimulated with recombinant CD40L
released higher amounts of IL-8 and had increased COX-2 (cyclo-oxygenase-2)
expression. We conclude that AngII stimulation of vascular cells leads to a
ROS-dependent increase in CD40/CD40L signalling pathway activity. This phenomenon
may be an important mechanism modulating the arterial injury observed in
atherosclerosis-related vasculopathy.

PMID: 18785879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2008 Sep;7(3):136-44.

The role of inflammation and allergy in acute coronary syndromes.

Ozben B(1), Erdogan O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul,
Turkey. besteozben@yahoo.com

It is well known that inflammatory mechanisms play a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. In recent years,
allergic episodes have been shown to be associated with acute coronary syndromes.
Mast cells release certain inflammatory mediators including histamine and neutral
proteases during an allergic episode and these inflammatory mediators are implied
to induce coronary artery spasm and/or atheromatous plaque erosion or rupture. As
the inflammatory component of acute coronary syndromes is a potential therapeutic
target, drugs that stabilize mast cell membrane and monoclonal antibodies that
protect mast cell surface may be effective in preventing allergy associated acute
coronary syndromes. In this review, we will mention the role of inflammation and 
allergy and anti-inflammatory therapeutic modalities in acute coronary syndromes.

PMID: 18782020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Periodontol. 2008 Aug;79(8 Suppl):1544-51. doi: 10.1902/jop.2008.080249.

Inflammation, C-reactive protein, and atherothrombosis.

Ridker PM(1), Silvertown JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 900 Commonwealth Avenue East, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Atherothrombosis of the coronary and cerebral vessels is understood to be a
disorder of inflammation and innate immunity, as well as a disorder of lipid
accumulation. From a vascular biology perspective, the processes of cellular
adhesion, monocyte and macrophage attachment, and transmigration of immune cells 
across the endothelium are crucial steps in early atherogenesis and in the later 
stages of mature plaque rupture, particularly the transition of unstable plaque
at the time of acute thrombosis. There is abundant clinical evidence
demonstrating that many biomarkers of inflammation are elevated years in advance 
of first ever myocardial infarction (MI) or thrombotic stroke and that these same
biomarkers are highly predictive of recurrent MI, recurrent stroke, diabetes, and
cardiovascular death. In daily practice, the inflammatory biomarker in widest use
is high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP); when interpreted within the
context of usual risk factors, levels of hsCRP <1, 1 to 3, and >3 mg/l denote
lower, average, and higher relative risk for future vascular events.
Risk-prediction models that incorporate hsCRP, such as the Reynolds Risk Score,
have been developed that improve risk classification and the accuracy for global 
risk prediction, particularly for those deemed at "intermediate risk" by usual
algorithms, such as the Framingham Risk Score. With regard to cerebral vessels,
increased biomarkers of inflammation, including hsCRP, have been associated with 
increased stroke risk as well as an increased rate of atherosclerosis progression
in the carotid vessels. Although the proportion of variation in hsCRP explained
by genetic factors may be as large as 20% to 40%, diet, exercise, and smoking
cessation remain critical tools for risk reduction and CRP reduction. Statin
therapy reduces hsCRP in a largely low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-independent
manner, and the "anti-inflammatory" properties of these agents have been
suggested as a potential mechanism beyond LDL reduction for the efficacy of these
agents. The ongoing multinational Justification for the Use of statins in Primary
prevention: an Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER) trial of
17,802 initially healthy men and women with low levels of LDL cholesterol but
increased levels of hsCRP will help to define whether vascular protection can be 
achieved with statin therapy, even in the absence of hyperlipidemia. Targeted
anti-inflammatory therapies are being developed that may provide a direct method 
of translating the biology of inflammation into new clinical treatments across
multiple vascular beds. This article summarizes data supporting a role for
inflammation in cardiovascular disease and offers the possibility that other
disorders characterized by inflammation, such as periodontal disease, may have an
indirect role by influencing the risk, manifestation, and progression of vascular
events.

PMID: 18673009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2008 Aug;8(9):912-8.

Apoptosis in atherosclerosis: a mini-review.

Karaflou M(1), Lambrinoudaki I, Christodoulakos G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, Aretaieion 
Hospital, 27 Themistokleous Street, Dionysos, Athens, Greece.
ilambrinoudaki@hotmail.com

Apoptosis in atherosclerotic lesions is triggered by inflammatory processes, both
via cell-cell contact and by cytokines and oxidized lipids. The role of apoptosis
in atherogenesis is dual, depending on the stage of the plaque: In early stages, 
apoptotic death of smooth muscle--and inflammatory cells, such as lymphocytes and
macrophages--may delay atherosclerotic process. However, once the plaque is
formed, apoptosis may lead to plaque rupture and thrombosis.

PMID: 18691148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Jun 16;101(12A):3F-10F. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.04.013.

Identifying the vulnerable patient with rupture-prone plaque.

Weintraub HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, New York University Medical
Center, 530 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. howard.weintraub@nyumc.edu

Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbidity and
mortality in the United States, and the obesity epidemic combined with aging of
the population seems destined to increase the burden of this disease. Traditional
cardiovascular risk assessment accounts for <50% of the variability in risk in
the United States. Therefore, better and more effective identification of persons
at high cardiovascular risk is needed. Our understanding of atherosclerosis has
shifted from a focal disease whose hallmark is symptoms caused by a severe
stenosis to a systemic disease characterized by endothelial dysfunction (ED) and 
plaque inflammation, with the potential for rupture and thrombosis mainly in
those with subcritical stenosis. Under the new paradigm, clinicians require
updated strategies to better assess the quality of arterial plaque. Effective
tools for primary and secondary prevention of heart attack and stroke include
intensive lifestyle modification, blood pressure reduction, and lipid-modifying
therapies. These interventions are now understood to decrease plaque inflammation
and thereby promote plaque stability. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2)
(Lp-PLA(2)) appears to be a specific marker of plaque inflammation that may play 
a direct role in the formation of rupture-prone plaque. In contrast, traditional 
risk factors, lipid measurement, and most vascular imaging modalities do not
directly assess the acute ischemic potential in the arterial wall. Measuring
Lp-PLA(2) levels in human serum or plasma is noninvasive and relatively
inexpensive. Lp-PLA(2) may provide additional clinically relevant information
that shows which patients have a high level of atherosclerotic disease activity
as manifested by vascular inflammation, ED, and increased risk for progression
toward rupture-prone plaque.

PMID: 18549869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Feb;202(2):550-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.05.050. Epub 2008 Jun 5.

Gender specific associations between matrix metalloproteinases and inflammatory
markers in post myocardial infarction patients.

Samnegård A(1), Hulthe J, Silveira A, Ericsson CG, Hamsten A, Eriksson P.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. ann.samnegard@ki.se

OBJECTIVE: Atherothrombotic disease in the coronary arteries leads to myocardial 
infarction (MI) through plaque rupture or erosion of the endothelium, the former 
mechanism predominating in men and the latter in women. Inflammation is a key
feature of these processes, and the interplay between inflammation and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in this context is not fully understood. In this study,
we investigated the association between inflammatory markers and MMPs in men and 
women.
METHODS: Blood samples were drawn 3 months after a first MI in 387 patients and
387 sex- and age-matched controls (82% men). C-reactive protein (CRP),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, -18, tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha),
macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), MMP-1, -3 and -9 were measured.
Coronary angiography was performed in 243 of the patients, and they were
classified into 0-, 1-, 2- or 3-vessel disease groups.
RESULTS: CRP, IL-6, -8, -18 and TNF-alpha were higher, and MMP-3 and -9 were
lower, in patients than in controls. A greater proportion of women (49%) had
0-vessel disease than men (16%, p<0.0001). A gender specific pattern of
associations between inflammatory markers and MMPs was found as IL-6 (r(S)=0.29, 
p<0.05), IL-18 (r(S)=0.34, p<0.01) and MCP-1 (r(S)=0.35, p<0.01) correlated with 
MMP-3 in female patients, whereas CRP (r(S)=0.23, p<0.0001), IL-6 (r(S)=0.13,
p<0.05) and IL-8 (r(S)=-0.21, p<0.01) correlated with MMP-9 in male patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates different patterns of association
between inflammatory markers and MMPs in men and women, strengthening the
hypothesis of gender specific differences in pathophysiological mechanisms of MI.

PMID: 18619594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Ann Med. 2008;40(8):606-21. doi: 10.1080/07853890802186913.

Inflammatory angiogenesis in atherogenesis--a double-edged sword.

Ribatti D(1), Levi-Schaffer F, Kovanen PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Histology, University of Bari Medical School, 
Bari, Italy. ribatti@anatomia.uniba.it

The adventitia and the outer layers of media of an atherosclerosis-prone arterial
wall are vascularized by vasa vasorum. Upon growth of an atherosclerotic lesion
in the intima, neovascular sprouts originating from the adventitial vasa vasorum 
enter the lesion, the local proangiogenic micromilieu in the lesion being created
by intramural hypoxia, by increased intramural oxidant stress, and by
inflammatory cell infiltration (macrophages, T cells and mast cells). The
angiogenic factors present in the lesions include various growth factors,
chemokines, cytokines, proteinases, and several other factors possessing direct
or indirect angiogenic activities, while the current list of antiangiogenic
factors is smaller. An imbalance between endogenous inducers and inhibitors of
angiogenesis, with a predominance of the former ones, is essential for the
development of neovessels during the progression of the lesion. By providing
oxygen and nutrients to the cells of atherosclerotic lesions, neovascularization 
initially tends to prevent cellular death and so contributes to plaque growth and
stabilization. However, the inflammatory cells may induce rupture of the fragile 
neovessels, and so cause intraplaque hemorrhage and ensuing plaque
destabilization. Pharmacological inhibition of angiogenesis in atherosclerotic
plaques with ensuing inhibition of lesion progression has been achieved in animal
models, but clinical studies aiming at regulation of angiogenesis in the
atherosclerotic arterial wall can be designed only after we have reached a firm
conclusion about the role of angiogenesis at various stages of lesion
development--good or bad.

PMID: 18608127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2008 Sep;5(9):531-40. doi: 10.1038/ncpcardio1279. 
Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Mechanisms of disease: the evolving role of regulatory T cells in
atherosclerosis.

George J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and the Cardiovascular Research Center, Tel Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Israel. jacobg@post.tau.ac.il

Atherosclerosis and related complications still represent the major cause of
morbidity and mortality in the western world. The mechanisms that govern the
progression and destabilization of atheromatous lesions are multiple and complex.
Despite their widespread use, lipid-lowering agents do not provide sufficient
protection from future clinical cardiovascular-associated events. Interest in the
role of immunity in atherosclerosis and support for this relationship has grown
significantly over recent years. This paradigm, in which inflammation is an
instrumental process in plaque development and rupture, is further supported by
studies showing that immune subsets are operative in atherosclerosis. Regulatory 
T-cell subpopulations consist of lymphocytes--with several phenotypic
markers--that share the ability to suppress, by various mechanisms, inflammatory 
responses. These regulatory T cells consist of subsets such as interleukin-10
secreting type I regulatory cells, type 3 effector T-helper cells that produce
transforming growth factor-beta, as well as adaptive and natural CD4(+)CD25(+)
regulatory T cells. In this Review, I focus on the direct and indirect evidence
for the involvement of regulatory T cells in atherogenesis in experimental models
and in humans. The growing knowledge of the role of regulatory T cells could
result in the future development of novel therapeutic modalities to attenuate
atherosclerosis and stabilize vulnerable plaques.

PMID: 18607396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008 Jul 1;52(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.03.036.

Radionuclide imaging: a molecular key to the atherosclerotic plaque.

Langer HF(1), Haubner R, Pichler BJ, Gawaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik III, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. langerh@mail.nih.gov

Despite primary and secondary prevention, serious cardiovascular events such as
unstable angina or myocardial infarction still account for one-third of all
deaths worldwide. Therefore, identifying individual patients with vulnerable
plaques at high risk for plaque rupture is a central challenge in cardiovascular 
medicine. Several noninvasive techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging,
multislice computed tomography, and electron beam tomography are currently being 
tested for their ability to identify such patients by morphological criteria. In 
contrast, molecular imaging techniques use radiolabeled molecules to detect
functional aspects in atherosclerotic plaques by visualizing their biological
activity. Based upon the knowledge about the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis, 
various studies in vitro and in vivo and the first clinical trials have used
different tracers for plaque imaging studies, including radioactive-labeled
lipoproteins, components of the coagulation system, cytokines, mediators of the
metalloproteinase system, cell adhesion receptors, and even whole cells. This
review gives an update on the relevant noninvasive plaque imaging approaches
using nuclear imaging techniques to detect atherosclerotic vascular lesions.

PMCID: PMC2683742
PMID: 18582628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Br J Neurosurg. 2008 Jun;22(3):350-9. doi: 10.1080/02688690802007891.

Modern methods for imaging carotid atheroma.

Trivedi RA(1), Gillard JH, Kirkpatrick PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Neurosurgery Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.
rikin.trivedi@addenbrookes.nhs.uk

Atherosclerotic disease of the carotid arteries has been identified as a major
cause of stroke and thromboembolism from ruptured atheroma plaques within the
walls of these vessels, has been proposed as the putative pathophysiological
event underlying cerebral ischaemia. Carotid endarterectomy has been shown to be 
superior to pharmacotherapy in reducing the likelihood of further disabling
stroke or death, in selected individuals. It is, therefore, necessary to identify
those individuals at highest risk of stroke, for whom the risks of aggressive
intervention may be worthwhile. Our understanding of atherosclerosis suggests
that plaque rupture is precipitated by inflammation that causes alteration in the
morphological composition and functional activity within the plaque resulting in 
exposure of thrombogenic material to the circulation. Identification of this in
vivo biological process or surrogate markers suggesting 'vulnerability' to plaque
rupture could, therefore, aid the selection of individuals for whom the risks of 
aggressive intervention may be warranted. This review outlines the imaging
modalities that have been evaluated for in vivo structural assessment of carotid 
plaques and risk stratification for selection for aggressive interventions. More 
recent strategies appear to be moving toward a combination of morphological and
functional imaging in order to visualize the pathophysiological mechanisms that
underlie plaque rupture.

PMID: 18568723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Clin Dev Immunol. 2008;2008:723539. doi: 10.1155/2008/723539.

Antigen-induced immunomodulation in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

Milioti N(1), Bermudez-Fajardo A, Penichet ML, Oviedo-Orta E.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Heath and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey
GU2 7XH, UK.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disorder characterised by the
accumulation of monocytes/macrophages, smooth muscle cells, and lymphocytes
within the arterial wall in response to the release of proinflammatory molecules.
Such accumulation results in the formation of the atherosclerotic plaque, which
would eventually evolve to complications such as total artery occlusion, rupture,
calcification, or aneurysm. Although the molecular mechanism responsible for the 
development of atherosclerosis is not completely understood, it is clear that the
immune system plays a key role in the development of the atherosclerotic plaque
and in its complications. There are multiple antigenic stimuli that have been
associated with the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Most of these stimuli come
from modified self-molecules such as oxidised low-density lipoproteins (oxLDLs), 
beta2glycoprotein1 (beta2GP1), lipoprotein a (LP(a)), heat shock proteins (HSPs),
and protein components of the extracellular matrix such as collagen and
fibrinogen in the form of advanced glycation-end (AGE) products. In addition,
several foreign antigens including bacteria such as Porphyromonas gingivalis and 
Chlamydia pneumoniae and viruses such as enterovirus and cytomegalovirus have
been associated with atherosclerosis as potentially causative or bystander
participants, adding another level of complexity to the analysis of the
pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. The present review summarises the most
important scientific findings published within the last two decades on the
importance of antigens, antigen stimulation, and adaptive immune responses in the
development of atherosclerotic plaques.

PMCID: PMC2423423
PMID: 18551190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biomech Eng. 2008 Jun;130(3):031013. doi: 10.1115/1.2913236.

Numerical analysis of the cooling effect of blood over inflamed atherosclerotic
plaque.

Kim T(1), Ley O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, MS 3123, College
Station, TX 77843-3123, USA. taehong-kim@tamu.edu

Atherosclerotic plaques with high likelihood of rupture often show local
temperature increase with respect to the surrounding arterial wall temperature.
In this work, atherosclerotic plaque temperature was numerically determined
during the different levels of blood flow reduction produced by the introduction 
of catheters at the vessel lumen. The temperature was calculated by solving the
energy equation and the Navier-Stokes equations in 2D idealized arterial models. 
Arterial wall temperature depends on three basic factors: metabolic activity of
the inflammatory cells embedded in the plaque, heat convection due to luminal
blood flow, and heat conduction through the arterial wall and plaque. The
calculations performed serve to simulate transient blood flow reduction produced 
by the presence of thermography catheters used to measure arterial wall
temperature. The calculations estimate the spatial and temporal alterations in
the cooling effect of blood flow and plaque temperature during the measurement
process. The mathematical model developed provides a tool for analyzing the
contribution of factors known to affect heat transfer at the plaque surface.
Blood flow reduction leads to a nonuniform temperature increase ranging from 0.1 
to 0.25 degrees Celsius in the plaque/lumen interface of the arterial geometries 
considered in this study. The temperature variation as well as the Nusselt number
calculated along the plaque surface strongly depended on the arterial geometry
and distribution of inflammatory cells. The calculations indicate that the
minimum required time to obtain a steady temperature profile after arterial
occlusion is 6 s. It was seen that in arteries with geometries involving bends,
the temperature profiles appear asymmetrical and lean toward the downstream edge 
of the plaque.

PMID: 18532862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 2008 Jun;7(2):139-51. doi: 10.1097/HPC.0b013e31816713d9.

Cytokines and coronary artery disease: the state of the art.

El-Menyar AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery, Hamad General Hospital
and Weill Cornell Medical College, Doha, Qatar. aymanco65@yahoo.com

Initiation and progression of coronary atherosclerosis has been associated with
inflammation and cytokines balance. The objective of this study is to understand 
the role of cytokines in the pathophysiology and management of coronary artery
disease. Coronary artery disease has been revisited with revision of the
pertinent published articles in the Medline, Scopus, and EBSCO Host research from
1987 to 2007. The 2 groups of cytokines (proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory)
have been detected in human atherosclerotic plaques. The balance between the 2
groups may reflect the intensity of occult plaque inflammation and the
vulnerability to rupture. Multiple studies have determined that a diverse set of 
proinflammatory biomarkers can furnish prognostic information beyond the
traditional risk factors. Inflammatory responses after coronary revascularization
are known to play key role in vascular lesion formation early in atherosclerosis 
and restenosis. Clinical utilization of cytokines remains promising yet
incompletely explored and need more studies.

PMID: 18520532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Jan;202(1):176-82. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.04.002. Epub 2008 Apr 12.

Interleukin 18 stimulates release of soluble lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 
(sLOX-1).

Mitsuoka H(1), Kume N, Hayashida K, Inui-Hayashiada A, Aramaki Y, Toyohara M,
Jinnai T, Nishi E, Kita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) appears to play crucial roles in
atherosclerotic plaque rupture. We previously reported that circulating soluble
LOX-1 (sLOX-1) levels are elevated in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and that
sLOX-1 can be a specific and sensitive biomarker for ACS. A proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin 18 (IL-18) and its receptor are prominently expressed in
atherosclerotic plaques. In addition, circulating IL-18 levels were reported to
be high in ACS. In this study, we have examined if IL-18 can stimulate shedding
of LOX-1 and subsequent release of sLOX-1. After transfection with LOX-1 cDNA,
HEK-293T cells were incubated with or without IL-18. Cell-conditioned media and
total cell lysates were subjected to immunoblot analyses with an anti-LOX-1
monoclonal antibody. In addition, ADAM10 cDNA, ADAM10 siRNA or control vector
were also co-transfected into HEK-293T cells, and the cell-conditioned media and 
total cell lysates were subjected to LOX-1 immunoblotting after treatment with or
without IL-18. The cell-conditioned medium/total cell lysate ratios in the
amounts of LOX-1 or sLOX-1 were determined as sLOX-1 cleavage ratios. IL-18
(10-100ng/mL) stimulation increased the sLOX-1 cleavage by 3-4-fold in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner. ADAM10 overexpression alone similarly
enhanced the sLOX-1 cleavage. ADAM10 inhibition by ADAM10 siRNA transfection
significantly suppressed IL-18-induced sLOX-1 cleavage. IL-18 similarly enhanced 
sLOX-1 cleavage in TNF-alpha-activated cultured endothelial cells, as well as
LOX-1 transgenic mice in vivo. IL-18 appears one of the stimuli that enhance
sLOX-1 release in ACS and ADAM10 may be involved in this process.

PMID: 18514661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2008 May;215(1):61-9.

Emodin promotes atherosclerotic plaque stability in fat-fed apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice.

Zhou M(1), Xu H, Pan L, Wen J, Guo Y, Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Increasing evidence indicated that plaque stabilization is attributed to the
composition of the atherosclerotic plaque, and inflammation plays an important
role in the formation and progress of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque (VAP),
which is prone to rupture. Emodin, an important component of traditional Chinese 
herb rhubarb, has obvious anti-inflammatory effect, although its effect on
atherosclerotic plaque stabilization is unknown. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is an
important component of plasma lipoprotein with anti-atherosclerosis function, and
the plaque in the aorta of ApoE-deficient mice has been demonstrated with
characteristics of VAP. Therefore, this study was designed to determine whether
emodin can stabilize the VAP in the ApoE-deficient mice and explain the possible 
mechanism. After fat-fed for 13 weeks, mice were randomized into three groups (11
animals/group) and intragastrically administrated with emodin, simvastatin or
distilled water for 13 weeks, respectively. The plaque stability was evaluated by
the morphology and composition of atherosclerotic plaques. Additionally, the
expression of peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma),
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) in plaques was determined by the immunohistochemistry
method. We showed that emodin could decrease the lipid core area and the ratio of
lipid to collagen content in plaques. In addition, emodin significantly inhibited
the expression of GM-CSF and MMP-9, whereas it induced the expression of
PPAR-gamma in plaques. In conclusion, these results suggest that emodin can
stabilize the VAP in the aortic root of ApoE-knockout mice, which is probably due
to its anti-inflammatory effect.

PMID: 18509236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Front Biosci. 2008 May 1;13:6483-90.

Overexpression of hypoxia/inflammatory markers in atherosclerotic carotid
plaques.

Luque A(1), Turu M, Juan-Babot O, Cardona P, Font A, Carvajal A, Slevin M, Iborra
E, Rubio F, Badimon L, Krupinski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Stroke Unit, University Hospital of Bellvitge and
IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

Hypoxia, angiogenesis and inflammation leads to plaque progression and
remodelling and may significantly contribute towards plaque rupture and
subsequent cerebrovascular events. Our aim was to study, markers of hypoxia and
inflammation previously identified by microarray analysis, in atherosclerotic
carotid arteries with low to moderate stenosis. We hoped to describe different
cellular populations expressing the studied markers. The location of selected
inflammatory molecules obtained as vascular transplants from organ donors were
analysed by immunohistochemistry with monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies.
Paraffin-embedded sections were cut and probed with antibodies recognizing active
B and T-lymphocytes (CD30), hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, endoglin (CD105),
Interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein. We observed a notable overexpression of
HIF-1alpha in inflammatory and hypoxic areas of carotid arteries in all types of 
lesions from type II-V taken from the patients with carotid stenosis less than
50%. This suggests that HIF-1alpha may have a putative role in atherosclerosis
progression and angiogenesis. Dynamic changes in the non-occluding plaques may
explain some of the clinical events in patients with low to moderate carotid
stenosis.

PMID: 18508674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2008;3(1):89-96.

Mechanisms of atherothrombosis in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fimognari FL(1), Scarlata S, Conte ME, Incalzi RA.

Author information: 
(1)Health Centre for Elderly, Chair of Geriatrics, University Campus Bio Medico, 
Rome, Italy.

Patients affected by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have an
increased risk of atherothrombotic acute events, independent of smoking and other
cardiovascular risk factors. As a consequence, myocardial ischemia is a relevant 
cause of death in these patients. We reviewed studies concerning the potential
mechanisms of atherothrombosis in COPD. Bronchial inflammation spreads to the
systemic circulation and is known to play a key role in plaque formation and
rupture. In fact, C-reactive protein blood levels increase in COPD and provide
independent prognostic information. Systemic inflammation is the first cause of
the hypercoagulable state commonly observed in COPD. Furthermore, hypoxia is
supposed to activate platelets, thus accounting for the increased urinary
excretion of platelet-derived thromboxane in COPD. The potential metabolic risk
in COPD is still debated, in that recent studies do not support an association
between COPD and diabetes mellitus. Finally, oxidative stress contributes to the 
pathogenesis of COPD and may promote oxidation of low-density-lipoproteins with
foam cells formation. Retrospective observations suggest that inhaled
corticosteroids may reduce atherothrombotic mortality by attenuating systemic
inflammation, but this benefit needs confirmation in ongoing randomized
controlled trials. Physicians approaching COPD patients should always be aware of
the systemic vascular implications of this disease.

PMCID: PMC2528208
PMID: 18488431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2009 May-Jun;18(3):140-7. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2008.03.001. 
Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Beneficial effects of fenofibrate on plaque thrombogenicity and plaque stability 
in atherosclerotic rabbits.

Jeanpierre E(1), Le Tourneau T, Zawadzki C, Van Belle E, Mouquet F, Susen S,
Ezekowitz MD, Staels B, Jude B, Corseaux D.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, ERI-9, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Fibrates are peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
(PPARalpha) agonists which modulate many aspects of lipoprotein metabolism and
inflammation. They have been recently demonstrated to inhibit in vitro expression
of tissue factor (TF), the main initiator of blood coagulation, which probably
plays a pivotal role in thrombotic complications after plaque rupture. We
investigated whether a 4-week fenofibrate treatment might affect the TF
expression and cellular modifications in angioplasty-induced rabbit plaque
rupture.
METHODS: After plaque rupture by balloon angioplasty in atheromatous rabbits,
animals were randomized in an untreated group or a group receiving fenofibrate.
The TF content of arterial wall and the histological modifications were analyzed 
after 4 weeks.
RESULTS: Fenofibrate decreased in vivo TF expression (-42%, P<.05) and plaque
cholesterol content (P<.01) in iliac arteries. Fenofibrate significantly improved
the reendothelialization process by 51% (P<.05) and modified cellular
distribution in the plaque toward increased stabilization.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that the PPARalpha-activator fenofibrate reduces
plaque thrombogenicity and accelerates endothelial regrowth which, altogether,
might improve plaque stability. These effects may underlie the preventive effects
of fibrate therapy in atherosclerosis complications.

PMID: 18436454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Jun 1;78(3):407-8. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn096. Epub 2008 Apr
14.

Targeting the prevention of plaque rupture as a new strategy for prevention of
acute arterial cardiovascular events.

Levi M, Stroes E.

Comment on
    Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Jun 1;78(3):429-39.

PMID: 18413321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Intern Med. 2008 May;263(5):506-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2008.01947.x.

From vulnerable plaque to atherothrombosis.

Thim T(1), Hagensen MK, Bentzon JF, Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University
Hospital (Skejby), Aarhus, Denmark. troels.thim@ki.au.dk

Plaque rupture precipitates approximately 75% of all fatal coronary thrombi.
Therefore, the plaque prone to rupture is the primary focus of this review. The
lipid-rich core and fibrous cap are pivotal in the understanding of plaque
rupture. Plaque rupture is a localized process within the plaque caused by
degradation of a tiny fibrous cap rather than by diffuse inflammation of the
plaque. Atherosclerosis is a multifocal disease, but plaques prone to rupture
seem to be oligofocal at most.

PMID: 18410594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Phytother Res. 2008 Jul;22(7):935-42. doi: 10.1002/ptr.2429.

Aqueous extract of rhubarb stabilizes vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques due to
depression of inflammation and lipid accumulation.

Liu Y(1), Yan F, Liu Y, Zhang C, Yu H, Zhang Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

The study evaluated the effect of the traditional Chinese medicine rhubarb on the
stability of atherosclerotic plaque. Atherosclerotic lesions were induced in
rabbits through balloon injury with a high-cholesterol diet and then were divided
into a control group, a rhubarb group and a simvastatin group. At week 24
recombinant-p53 adenoviruses were locally delivered to the atherosclerotic
plaques. At week 26 plaque rupture was triggered by the intra-arterial Chinese
Russell's viper venom and histamine. Serological, ultrasonographic, pathologic,
immunohistochemical and gene expression studies were performed. The results
showed that the incidence of plaque rupture in the rhubarb group and the
simvastatin group was significantly lower than that in the control group (42.86% 
and 35.71% versus 80.00%, both p < 0.05). Serum TC, LDL-C (p < 0.05-0.01), IMT
(both p < 0.01), PA (both p < 0.01), PB (%) (both p < 0.01) and the mRNA and
protein expressions of TLR2, TLR4 and NF-kappaB (p < 0.05, 0.01, respectively) in
the rhubarb group and the simvastatin group were significantly lower than those
in the control group. In contrast, AIIc% (both p < 0.05) in the two treatment
groups were significantly higher than those in the control group. These results
suggest that rhubarb has antiatherosclerotic and plaque-stabilizing properties
due to antiinflammation and lipid-lowering effects.

PMID: 18384190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2004 Jun;2(2):105-13. doi: 10.1089/met.2004.2.105.

Inflammation, insulin resistance, and atherosclerosis.

Theuma P(1), Fonseca VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana.

Until recently, atherosclerosis was thought to be a passive process of lipid
deposition in the arterial wall, followed by progressive occlusion of the lumen, 
and finally plaque rupture and thrombosis. Recent data suggest the
contrary-atherosclerosis is a dynamic process developing over many years,
characterized by active uptake of lipids and smooth muscle proliferation,
"molding" of plaque, and subject to the influence of many environmental and
genetic factors. Central to these processes, both at initiation and propagation, 
are factors associated with inflammation. Insulin resistance (IR), the underlying
cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), is also associated with elevated levels
of inflammatory factors, such as C reactive protein (CRP), plasminogen activator 
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and fibrinogen. Recent studies indicate that these same
factors precede and predict DM. These findings have led to the notion that the
strong association of IR/DM with cardiovascular disease (CVD) may be through
inflammation pathways. In this article, we review what is known about the
association of inflammation with IR and atherosclerosis. We show that many of the
same inflammatory factors associated with IR are present in atherosclerosis. We
also discuss the underlying determinants of inflammation in these conditions.

PMID: 18370641  [PubMed]


369. Rev Port Cardiol. 2007 Dec;26(12):1357-63.

Variations in inflammatory markers in acute myocardial infarction: a longitudinal
study.

Napoleão P(1), Santos MC, Selas M, Viegas-Crespo AM, Pinheiro T, Ferreira RC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Universidade Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
pnapoleao@itn.pt

Inflammation is now considered a key component of atherosclerosis, from fatty
streak formation to plaque rupture, subsequent thrombosis, and progressive
mechanical and dynamic obstruction. Rupture of the arterial plaque's fibrous cap 
exposes tissue factors present in the necrotic core, triggering inflammatory
signaling, cell adhesion, and the coagulation cascade that eventually leads to
thrombus. Cytokines and adhesion molecules are key components of these events
that contribute to the development of an atherosclerotic plaque. The cytokine
TNF-alpha and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) are indicators of basal 
inflammation, while the soluble forms of adhesion molecules such as CD40L and
P-selectin indicate the extent of platelet activation. This study reports on the 
follow-up of 17 patients with confirmed acute myocardial infarction (AMI group)
undergoing angioplasty and a matched control group of 16 patients without
coronary artery disease as verified by coronary angiography. Patients from the
AMI group were assessed at the onset of the acute coronary syndrome, within 24 h,
before the administration of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors and coronary
angioplasty, and during the recovery period, two and 40 days after intervention. 
For both groups, clinical characteristics were documented and serum
concentrations of soluble CD40L, P-selectin, ICAM-1, TNF-alpha, and conventional 
biochemical indicators were analyzed. For AMI patients, these indicators were
recorded at study entry and during follow-up. Concentrations of cytokines and
adhesion molecules were measured using commercial immunoassay (ELISA) kits.
Significant variations in sP-selectin were observed relative to the control
group. Immediately after myocardial infarction, sP-selectin levels rose markedly,
followed by a sharp decrease two days later. After 40 days of recovery,
sP-selectin levels rose again, returning to the initial values. Variations in
sCD40L levels were not significant relative to controls. However, sCD40L
concentrations tended to fall until the second day after infarction, followed by 
a rise, and by the 40th day of recovery levels were slightly higher than
controls. Unlike sCD40L and sP-selectin, consistently higher levels of TNF-alpha 
relative to controls were observed, which were only significant after 40 days of 
recovery. No significant variations were observed for ICAM-1 serum concentrations
in the AMI group. The variations observed demonstrate the role of inflammatory
markers in AMI progression and highlight the importance of systemic inflammation 
in disease evolution. The increased concentration of sP-selectin at infarction
onset is evidence of thrombosis and platelet activation. Later, during the
recovery period when hemodynamic variables are returning to stability in part due
to medication, rises in circulating levels of sCD40L and cytokines such as
TNF-alpha may reflect the role of these molecules in the recovery of endothelial 
and myocardial tissues.

PMID: 18338665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Thromb Haemost. 2008 Mar;99(3):480-6. doi: 10.1160/TH07-11-0685.

Platelet-vessel wall interactions in atherosclerotic disease.

Langer HF(1), Gawaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik III, Klinik für Kardiologie und Kreislauferkrankungen,
Eberhard Karls-Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
harald.langer@med.uni-tuebingen.de

During the prolonged course of atherosclerotic disease, platelets are of central 
importance as they contribute to the initiation of the disease, to its
progression and acute exacerbation but also provide potential regenerative
mechanisms. Platelets secrete chemokines and cytokines that mediate vascular
inflammation and are in turn activated by substances released from cells of the
vascular wall. These interactions represent positive and negative feedback loops,
which in case of dysregulation may lead to development and progression of
disease. Furthermore, platelet adhesion to the endothelium is critical for the
initiation of atherosclerotic lesion formation in vivo. Even prior to endothelial
denudation, platelet adhesion governed by disturbed flow at predilection sites
for atherosclerosis induces recruitment of proatherosclerotic cells and release
of proinflammatory mediators from all involved cell types. Finally, the
pathogenetic role of platelets for late atheroclerotic events including plaque
rupture, microembolism or spasms within the microcirculation is well established.
However, increasing evidence indicates that platelets mediate on the other hand
potential regenerative mechanisms. Platelets recruit circulating progenitor cells
to sites of vascular injury. Furthermore, they influence their biological
activity and maturation. Therefore, platelets contribute at all stages of
vascular disease by interfering with highly dynamic processes. Understanding
interactions of platelets with other circulating cells and the vascular wall is a
prerequisite to understand cardiovascular disease and to identify potential
therapeutic targets.

PMID: 18327395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Ann Med. 2008;40(2):121-8. doi: 10.1080/07853890701753672.

Acute respiratory tract infections: a potential trigger for the acute coronary
syndrome.

Harskamp RE(1), van Ginkel MW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Division of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.
r.e.harskamp@gmail.com

Clinical studies suggest that acute respiratory tract infection (ARTI) may be a
risk factor for the acute coronary syndrome (ACS). ARTI is associated with an
increased risk for ACS up to 2 weeks prior to a cardiac event. The mechanism that
may underlie this association is unclear. Infections are thought to play a role
in the progression and instability of atherosclerotic plaques, resulting in
plaque rupture, sudden constriction, and/or blockage of coronary arteries.
Inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and thrombotic activation seem to play an
important role in this. Influenza vaccination may reduce the risk of ACS in
patients with coronary artery disease. Future studies will provide more
information about the underlying mechanisms of infection-related ACS.

PMID: 18293142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Sep;200(1):58-68. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.047. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Role of cathepsin K in structural changes in brachiocephalic artery during
progression of atherosclerosis in apoE-deficient mice.

Samokhin AO(1), Wong A, Saftig P, Brömme D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Cathepsin K, a potent extracellular matrix degrading cysteine protease, has been 
linked to the pathogenesis of osteoporosis, arthritis, cardiovascular and
respiratory diseases. Here, we report the effects of cathepsin K deficiency
(ctsK-/-) on atherosclerotic plaque formation in brachiocephalic arteries in an
aggressive atherosclerosis model using apoE-deficient mice on cholate-containing 
high fat diet (HFD). On this diet, apoE-/- mice displayed severe lesions with
buried fibrous caps after 8 weeks, whereas the apoE-/-ctsK-/- mice revealed a
significantly decreased number of buried fibrous caps accompanied by increased
collagen content in plaque areas and fibrous cap thickness. After 16 weeks of
HFD, ctsK-/- mice had smaller plaque areas and maintained the structure of the
tunica media in terms of their smooth muscle cell content and elastic lamina
integrity. Overall macrophage content in the tunica media was lower in ctsK-/-
mice but higher in the plaque area after 8 weeks of HFD. Decreased apoptosis
rates in atherosclerotic plaques in brachiocephalic arteries of cathepsin
K-deficient indicated a lower level of inflammation. In conclusion, cathepsin K
deficiency appears to increase lesion stability in brachiocephalic arteries by
maintaining the integrity of the tunica media and by decreasing plaque
vulnerability to rupture.

PMID: 18291403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2008 Feb;51(2):188-95. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e31815f2bce.

Molecular mechanisms of felodipine suppressing atherosclerosis in
high-cholesterol-diet apolipoprotein E-knockout mice.

Yao R(1), Cheng X, Liao YH, Chen Y, Xie JJ, Yu X, Ding YJ, Tang TT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China.

Oxidative stress and inflammation processes are key components of
atherosclerosis, from fatty streak formation to plaque rupture and thrombosis.
Evidence has revealed that calcium-channel blockers (CCB) could retard
atherogenesis, but the exact mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. The
present study was undertaken to investigate the potential effects and molecular
mechanisms of the CCB felodipine on the process of atherosclerosis in
high-cholesterol-diet (HCD) apolipoprotein E-knockout (ApoE KO) mice. Adult male 
ApoE KO mice were given a normal diet (ND) or HCD and were randomized to no
treatment or felodipine (5 mg / kg per day for 12 weeks). The ApoE KO mice with
HCD were associated with a marked increase in plasma lipid levels,
atherosclerotic lesion area, and the expressions of NADPH oxidase subunits (p47
and Rac-1), nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) in nucleus, phosphor-inhibitors of 
kappaB (p-IkappaB), tumor necrosis-alpha (TNF-alpha), monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1), and vascular cell-adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). These changes 
were suppressed in mice that were treated with felodipine (5 mg/kg per day for 12
weeks) concomitant with HCD administration, with no significant change in
systolic blood pressure and plasma lipid levels. The results suggest that
felodipine can attenuate atherosclerosis, and this effect is partly related to
inhibition of oxidative stress and inflammatory signal-transduction pathways,
which lead to decreases in the expression of inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 18287887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Circulation. 2008 Mar 11;117(10):1292-301. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.699173. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

CD137 is expressed in human atherosclerosis and promotes development of plaque
inflammation in hypercholesterolemic mice.

Olofsson PS(1), Söderström LA, Wågsäter D, Sheikine Y, Ocaya P, Lang F, Rabu C,
Chen L, Rudling M, Aukrust P, Hedin U, Paulsson-Berne G, Sirsjö A, Hansson GK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, L8:03, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna,
171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. Peder.Olofsson@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is a multifactorial disease in which inflammatory
processes play an important role. Inflammation underlies lesion evolution at all 
stages, from establishment to plaque rupture and thrombosis. Costimulatory
molecules of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily such as CD40/CD40L and
OX40/OX40L have been implicated in atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study shows that the tumor necrosis factor superfamily 
members CD137 and CD137 ligand (CD137L), which play a major role in several
autoimmune diseases, may constitute a pathogenic pair in atherogenesis. We
detected CD137 protein in human atherosclerotic lesions not only on T cells but
also on endothelial cells and showed that CD137 in cultured endothelial cells and
smooth muscle cells was induced by proinflammatory cytokines implicated in
atherosclerosis. Activation of CD137 by CD137L induced adhesion molecule
expression on endothelial cells and reduced smooth muscle cell proliferation. In 
addition, treatment of atherosclerosis-prone apolipoprotein E-deficient mice with
a CD137 agonist caused increased inflammation. T-cell infiltration, mainly of
CD8(+) cells, and expression of the murine major histocompatibility complex class
II molecule I-A(b) increased significantly in atherosclerotic lesions, as did the
aortic expression of proinflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these observations suggest that CD137-CD137L
interactions in the vasculature may contribute to the progression of
atherosclerosis via augmented leukocyte recruitment, increased inflammation, and 
development of a more disease-prone phenotype.

PMID: 18285570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Dec;12(6A):2362-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00261.x.
Epub 2008 Feb 4.

Dominant-negative mutation of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 prevents
vulnerable plaques from rupture in rabbits independent of serum lipid levels.

Zhong L(1), Chen WQ, Ji XP, Zhang M, Zhao YX, Yao GH, Zhang PF, Zhang C, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodelling and Function Research,
Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University
Qilu Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Active inflammation is an important feature of vulnerable plaques, and monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) is a key chemokine that promotes
monocyte-endothelium binding and initiates inflammation. We aimed to determine
whether dominant-negative mutation of MCP-1 could reverse atherosclerotic lesion 
progression and prevent vulnerable plaques from rupture regardless of serum lipid
levels. The mutant MCP-1 was produced by deletion of the N-terminal amino acids 2
to 8 (7ND), and a eukaryotic expression vector plRES-EGFP-7ND was constructed.
The transwell chamber was used to assay chemotaxis of monocytes in vitro. Thirty 
New Zealand white rabbits underwent balloon-induced abdominal aortic endothelial 
injury and were randomly divided into control group without gene intervention
(group A, n=10), plRES-EGFP-7ND treatment group (group B, n=10) and empty vector 
treatment group (group C, n=10). All rabbits were fed a diet of 1% cholesterol
for 8 weeks, and then group A rabbits were killed, whereas groups B and C rabbits
received an intramuscular injection of plRES-EGFP-7ND and an empty lipofectamine,
respectively, and remained on a high cholesterol diet for 4 weeks. At the end of 
week 12, groups B and C rabbits underwent pharmacological triggering by injection
with Chinese Russellis viper venom and histamine. Serum lipids and inflammatory
markers were measured, and high-frequency ultra-sonography and intravascular
ultrasound imaging were performed. Immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR were used to
examine expression of inflammatory markers in the plaques. In vitro transfection 
of plRES-EGFP-7ND resulted in a significant inhibition of monocyte chemotaxis
(P<0.05) and in vivo transfection of plRES-EGFP-7ND significantly increased the
thickness of the fibrous caps and decreased plaque vulnerability index. The
incidence of plaque rupture in group B was 0% as compared with 56% in the empty
vector treatment group (P<0.05). The serum levels and expression of inflammatory 
markers were significantly reduced in group B. In conclusion, PIRES-EGFP-7ND
transfection effectively inhibits plaque inflammation, reverses plaque
progression and prevents vulnerable plaques from rupture. These therapeutic
effects are independent of serum lipid levels and demonstrate that inhibition of 
plaque inflammation alone without lipid lowering can stabilize vulnerable
plaques.

PMCID: PMC4514114
PMID: 18266972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Kardiologiia. 2007;47(9):62-6.

[Activity of inflammatory-destructive changes in the process of formation of
unstable atherosclerotic plaque].

[Article in Russian]

Ragino IuI(1), Cherniavskiĭ AM, Polonskaia IaV, Volkov AM, Semaeva EV, Voevoda
MI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Therapy, Vladimirsky spusk, 2a, 630003, Novosibirsk, Russia.

We studied parameters of inflammatory (tumor necrosis factor a, antagonist of
interleukin-1 receptor, interleukin-6 , interleukin-8, C-reactive protein) and
destructive (matrix metalloproteinases type 3 and 9, tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase type 1) processes in dynamics of sequential stages of
development of atherosclerotic foci in coronary arteries: unchanged intimal
tissue --> lipid stain/streak --> stable young plaque --> unstable vulnerable
plaque with inclination to ulceration of rupture --> stable plaque with
fibrosis/calcinosis, and in various types of unstable plaques in men with
coronary atherosclerosis. Characteristic for unstable plaques parameters of
inflammatory activity were elevated levels of interleukins (IL) 6 and 8,
C-reactive protein (CRP), of destructive activity -- elevated level of
metalloproteinases-9. In inflammatory erosive type of unstable plaques (lowered
level of antagonist of interleukin-1 receptor and elevated level of CRP) and in
lipid type (elevated levels of IL-6, IL-8 and CRP) inflammatory activity was
dominating compared with necrotic type in which dominated destructive activity
(elevated level of tumor necrosis factor a and lowered level of tissue inhibitor 
of metalloproteinase type 1).

PMID: 18260930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Lipid Res. 2008 May;49(5):1015-23. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700535-JLR200. Epub 2008
Feb 2.

Human C-reactive protein promotes oxidized low density lipoprotein uptake and
matrix metalloproteinase-9 release in Wistar rats.

Singh U(1), Dasu MR, Yancey PG, Afify A, Devaraj S, Jialal I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is present in the atherosclerotic plaques and appears to
promote atherogenesis. Intraplaque CRP colocalizes with oxidized low density
lipoprotein (OxLDL) and macrophages in human atherosclerotic lesions. Matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) has been implicated in plaque rupture. CRP promotes
OxLDL uptake and MMP induction in vitro; however, these have not been
investigated in vivo. We examined the effect of CRP on OxLDL uptake and MMP-9
production in vivo in Wistar rats. CRP significantly increased OxLDL uptake in
the peritoneal and sterile pouch macrophages compared with human serum albumin
(huSA). CRP also significantly increased intracellular cholesteryl ester
accumulation compared with huSA. The increased uptake of OxLDL by CRP was
inhibited by pretreatment with antibodies to CD32, CD64, CD36, and fucoidin,
suggesting uptake by both scavenger receptors and Fc-gamma receptors.
Furthermore, CRP treatment increased MMP-9 activity in macrophages compared with 
huSA, which was abrogated by inhibitors to p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB but
not Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) before human CRP treatment. Because OxLDL uptake 
by macrophages contributes to foam cell formation and MMP release contributes to 
plaque instability, this study provides novel in vivo evidence for the role of
CRP in atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC2311439
PMID: 18245817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Recent Pat Cardiovasc Drug Discov. 2007 Jan;2(1):69-72.

Role of infrasound pressure waves in atherosclerotic plaque rupture: a
theoretical approach.

Tsatsaris A(1), Koukounaris E, Motsakos T, Perrea D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Surgery and Surgical Research, School of Medicine,
University of Athens, Greece. tsapol@otenet.gr

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of infrasound aortic pressure waves (IPW) in
atherosclerotic plaque rupture.
METHODS: Atherosclerotic plaques have been simulated partly, in two dimensions,
as being short or long Conical Intersections (CIS), that is to say elliptic,
parabolic or hyperbolic surfaces. Consequently, the course and reflection of the 
generated aortic pressure wave (infrasound domain-less than 20Hz) has been
examined around the simulated plaques.
RESULTS: The incidence of IPW on plaque surface results both in reflection and
"refraction" of the wave. The IPW course within tissue, seems to be enhanced by
high Cu-level presence at these areas according to recent evidence
(US2003000388213). The "refracted", derived wave travels through plaque tissue
and is eventually accumulated to the foci of the respective CIS-plaque geometry.
CONCLUSIONS: The foci location within or underneath atheroma declares zones where
infrasound energy is mostly absorbed. This process, among other mechanisms may
contribute to plaque rupture through the development of local hemorrhage and
inflammation in foci areas. In future, detection of foci areas and repair (i.e.
via Laser Healing Microtechnique) may attenuate atherosclerotic plaque rupture
behavior.

PMID: 18221105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Curr Pharm Des. 2007;13(36):3701-10.

Immune-mediated mechanisms in atherosclerosis: prevention and treatment of
clinical manifestations.

Niessner A(1), Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lowance Center for Human Immunology, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, 101 Woodruff Circle, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Accumulation of inflammatory cells identifies atherosclerotic plaque at risk for 
rupture. Typically, activated immune cells occupy the rupture-prone areas of the 
atherosclerotic lesion. These cells are an appealing therapeutic target for novel
strategies of plaque stabilization. Biologic consequences of plaque inflammation 
ultimately depend not only on the cellular players populating the lesion but also
on triggers of immune activation originating from within the plaque or arriving
from the circulation, and immune effector mechanisms that mediate cellular damage
and plaque destabilization. Recent studies have provided insights into particular
immune mechanisms in the atherosclerotic plaque that contribute to plaque
vulnerability. This knowledge provides the basis for potential immunomodulatory
therapies in cardiovascular disease. These therapeutic approaches can be
classified as (1) immunomodulatory effects of existing therapies, (2) therapies
targeting inflammatory triggers, and (3) agents inhibiting specific immune
mechanisms.

PMID: 18220809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2007 Nov;3(4):268-73.

Insulin resistance and postprandial hyperglycemia the bad companions in natural
history of diabetes: effects on health of vascular tree.

Di Filippo C(1), Verza M, Coppola L, Rossi F, D'Amico M, Marfella R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, 2nd University of Naples, Via
Costantinopoli 16, Naples, Italy. clara.difilippo@unina2.it

In diabetic patients the incidence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) is higher
compared with those without diabetes. This elevated incidence may be due to an
increased prevalence of established risk factors, such as obesity, dyslipidemia
and hypertension. However, several other determinants must be considered.
Attention must be paid to the role that specific factors strictly related to
diabetes, insulin-resistance and post-prandial hyperglycemia, play in the
etiopathogenesis of CVD, as for example atherosclerosis. This review acknowledges
the incidence of diabetes on cardiovascular diseases and atherosclerosis from
endothelial dysfunction to plaque destabilization, suggesting that insulin
resistance and postprandial hyperglycemia should be considered keys in the
generation of these worst diabetic cardiovascular outcomes. It finds in
hyperglycemia the primum movens that mediates the cascade of vascular damaging
events from the beginning of ROS formation to plaque rupture, through increased
inflammation. It also adds insights of why diverse therapeutic interventions,
which have in common the ability to reduce oxidative stress and inflammation, can
impede or delay the onset of complication of atherosclerosis in diabetic
patients.

PMID: 18220686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Int J Cardiol. 2008 Jul 4;127(2):157-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.11.054. Epub 
2008 Jan 22.

Imaging of the unstable plaque.

Tan KT(1), Lip GY.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bristol, Department of Radiology, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Bristol BS2 8HW, England, United Kingdom.

Atherosclerosis is now considered a systemic inflammatory disorder affecting the 
arterial tree. Inflammation plays a role in all stages of the disease, from the
initiation of the fatty streak to the final stage of plaque rupture.
Atherosclerotic plaques that demonstrate the features of active inflammation are 
more likely to become symptomatic. In addition to having a higher risk of
developing adverse cardiovascular events, patients who have higher indices of
inflammation may be more likely to develop restenosis after endovascular
stenting. Thus, the identification of the 'inflamed plaque' is the subject of
intense research. The detection of the inflamed plaque by the conventional
modalities of ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography and
nuclear medicine as well as the novel imaging modalities of optical coherence
tomography, near-infrared spectroscopy, thermography and angioscopy will be
examined.

PMID: 18207257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biomark Insights. 2008 May 12;2:361-7.

Changes in Hyaluronan Metabolism and RHAMM Receptor Expression Accompany
Formation of Complicated Carotid Lesions and May be Pro-Angiogenic Mediators of
Intimal Neovessel Growth.

Krupinski J(1), Ethirajan P, Font MA, Turu MM, Gaffney J, Kumar P, Slevin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Stroke Unit, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge
(HUB), and IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

Previous studies have shown that changes in expression of the glycosaminoglycan, 
hyaluronan (HA) were associated with erosion in areas of post-mortem coronary
artery liable to rupture. Angiogenesis is an important feature of ulcerating
haemorrhagic plaques prone to rupture. HA is a glycosaminoglycan known to possess
potent angiogenic properties on metabolism to oligosaccharides of HA (o-HA) in
the presence of hyaluronidase (HYAL) enzymes. In this study, we have examined HA 
receptor and HYAL enzyme expression in a series of carotid artery specimens used 
as vascular transplants and exhibiting various stages of atherosclerotic lesions 
as determined by anatomo-pathology. Our results demonstrated dramatically
increased expression of HYAL-1 in regions of inflammation associated with
complicated plaques. Receptor for HA-mediated motility (RHAMM), which is known to
be important in transducing angiogenic signals in vascular endothelium, was
strongly expressed on intimal blood vessels from complicated lesions but almost
absent from other regions including adventitial vessels. Metabolism of HA,
together with up-regulation of RHAMM in complicated plaque lesions might be
partly responsible for over-production of leaky neovessels and predisposition to 
plaque rupture.

PMCID: PMC2717833
PMID: 19662229  [PubMed]


383. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Mar;23(3):381-90.

Atherosclerosis and oxidative stress.

Bonomini F(1), Tengattini S, Fabiano A, Bianchi R, Rezzani R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Anatomy, Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Biotechnology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

This review focuses on the morphological features of atherosclerosis and the
involvement of oxidative stress in the initiation and progression of this
disease. There is now consensus that atherosclerosis represents a state of
heightened oxidative stress characterized by lipid and protein in the vascular
wall. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are key mediators of signaling pathways that 
underlie vascular inflammation in atherogenesis, starting from the initiation of 
fatty streak development, through lesion progression, to ultimate plaque rupture.
Plaque rupture and thrombosis result in the acute clinical complications of
myocardial infarction and stroke. Many data support the notion that ROS released 
from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, myeloperoxidase
(MPO), xanthine oxidase (XO), lipoxygenase (LO), nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and 
enhanced ROS production from dysfunctional mitochondrial respiratory chain,
indeed, have a causatory role in atherosclerosis and other vascular diseases.
Moreover, oxidative modifications in the arterial wall can contribute to the
arteriosclerosis when the balance between oxidants and antioxidants shifts in
favour of the former. Therefore, it is important to consider sources of oxidants 
in the context of available antioxidants such as superoxide dismutase (SOD),
catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glutathione reductase and
transferases thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases and peroxiredoxins. Here, we review 
also the mechanisms in which they are involved in order to accelerate the pace of
the discovery and facilitate development of novel therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 18072094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Circ Res. 2008 Feb 15;102(3):302-9. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

Extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (CD147) is a novel receptor on
platelets, activates platelets, and augments nuclear factor kappaB-dependent
inflammation in monocytes.

Schmidt R(1), Bültmann A, Fischel S, Gillitzer A, Cullen P, Walch A, Jost P,
Ungerer M, Tolley ND, Lindemann S, Gawaz M, Schömig A, May AE.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Herzzentrum und I. Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Lazarettstr. 36, 80636 München, Germany.
schmidtr@dhm.mhn.de

In atherosclerosis, circulating platelets interact with endothelial cells and
monocytes, leading to cell activation and enhanced recruitment of leukocytes into
the vascular wall. The invasion of monocytes is accompanied by overexpression of 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are thought to promote atherosclerosis
and trigger plaque rupture. Following interaction with itself, the extracellular 
matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) induces MMP synthesis via a
little-known intracellular pathway. Recently, we showed upregulation of EMMPRIN
on monocytes during acute myocardial infarction. EMMPRIN also stimulates
secretion of MMP-9 by monocytes and of MMP-2 by smooth muscle cells, indicating
that it may be an important regulator of MMP activity. Expression of EMMPRIN on
platelets has not been described until now. Here, we demonstrate that resting
platelets show low surface expression of EMMPRIN, which is upregulated by various
platelet stimulators (flow cytometry). EMMPRIN is located in the open canalicular
system and in alpha granules of platelets (according to electron microscopy and
sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation). Platelet stimulation with recombinant
EMMPRIN-Fc induced surface expression of CD40L and P-selectin (according to flow 
cytometry), suggesting that EMMPRIN-EMMPRIN interaction activates platelets.
Coincubation of platelets with monocytes induced EMMPRIN-mediated nuclear factor 
kappaB activation (according to Western blot) in monocytes with increased MMP-9
(zymography), interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha secretion (according
to ELISA) by monocytes. In conclusion, EMMPRIN displays a new platelet receptor
that is upregulated on activated platelets. Binding of EMMPRIN to platelets
fosters platelet degranulation. Platelet-monocyte interactions via EMMPRIN
stimulate nuclear factor kappaB-driven inflammatory pathways in monocytes, such
as MMP and cytokine induction. Thus, EMMPRIN may represent a novel target to
diminish the burden of protease activity and inflammation in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18048771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Annu Rev Pathol. 2006;1:297-329.

Inflammation and atherosclerosis.

Hansson GK(1), Robertson AK, Söderberg-Nauclér C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm SE-17176, Sweden. Goran.Hansson@ki.se

Atherosclerosis, the cause of myocardial infarction, stroke, and ischemic
gangrene, is an inflammatory disease. The atherosclerotic process is initiated
when cholesterol-containing low-density lipoproteins accumulate in the intima and
activate the endothelium. Leukocyte adhesion molecules and chemokines promote
recruitment of monocytes and T cells. Monocytes differentiate into macrophages
and upregulate pattern recognition receptors, including scavenger receptors and
toll-like receptors. Scavenger receptors mediate lipoprotein internalization,
which leads to foam-cell formation. Toll-like receptors transmit activating
signals that lead to the release of cytokines, proteases, and vasoactive
molecules. T cells in lesions recognize local antigens and mount T helper-1
responses with secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines that contribute to local
inflammation and growth of the plaque. Intensified inflammatory activation may
lead to local proteolysis, plaque rupture, and thrombus formation, which causes
ischemia and infarction. Inflammatory markers are already used to monitor the
disease process and anti-inflammatory therapy may be useful to control disease
activity.

PMID: 18039117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Top Magn Reson Imaging. 2007 Oct;18(5):409-17.

Magnetic resonance molecular imaging contrast agents and their application in
atherosclerosis.

Mulder WJ(1), Strijkers GJ, Vucic E, Cormode DP, Nicolay K, Fayad ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Sinai Translational and Molecular Imaging Institute and Imaging Science
Laboratories, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
willem.mulder@mountsinai.org

Heart disease is the most prevalent cause of mortality in the Western world and
is most frequently caused by rupture of lesions in the arteries, which are formed
by atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a progressive disease, and therefore,
there is a strong motivation to be able to image the stages of this disease in
vivo. The pathogenesis of this disease is now well established, and a number of
markers such as macrophages, vascular adhesion molecules, fibrin, and the
alphanubeta3-integrin have been identified that are of particular interest for
imaging. Furthermore, the differentiation between the stable and unstable plaque 
with imaging is a central goal of the field. Contrast can be generated in
magnetic resonance imaging through the application of several types of agents
such as T1, T2, chemical exchange saturation transfer or 19F-based imaging
agents. Subsequent to the discussion of the above topics, we will describe some
examples of molecular imaging agents that successfully detect specific markers in
atherosclerotic plaques that are of interest in several stages of this disease.

PMID: 18025995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Med Res Rev. 2008 Jul;28(4):483-544.

Macrophages: an elusive yet emerging therapeutic target of atherosclerosis.

Tiwari RL(1), Singh V, Barthwal MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226001,
India.

Macrophages are central to the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis and 
thus can be very appropriate targets for therapy. Cell adhesion molecules
mediating monocytes recruitment to the endothelium are attractive therapy targets
and their inhibitors are in clinical trials. Macrophage scavenger receptors like 
SR-A and CD-36 mediate foam cell formation by facilitating the uptake of modified
lipids. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR), liver X receptor
(LXR)-mediated signaling, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) induced
phosphorylation events seem to play an important role in this phenomenon.
Proteins affecting macrophage cholesterol metabolism and transport, including
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) A1, ABCG1, acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase
(ACAT), apolipoprotein A-1 (ApoA-1), neutral cholesteryl ester hydrolase (NCEH)
also regulate foam cell formation and are being developed as therapeutic targets 
by many pharmaceutical companies. Macrophage proliferation and apoptosis are
important events controlling inflammatory response, plaque vulnerability, and
destabilization. Free cholesterol (FC) activates the macrophage endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress pathway and apoptosis. Free radicals and nitric oxide also 
modulate macrophage foam cell formation and apoptosis. Various antioxidants like 
AGI-1067 and BO-653 are in clinical trials for atherosclerosis treatment.
Macrophage matrix metalloproteinase's (MMP's) play a significant role in
weakening and rupture of plaques. Efforts are on to develop isoform specific MMP 
inhibitor. CD-14, MMP-3, ABCA1, Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR-4), lectin-like
oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1), arachidonate lipoxygenase-15
(ALOX-15), and Connexin37 polymorphisms and macrophage dysfunction signify their 
importance in atherosclerosis. Deciphering the role of macrophages in regulating 
dyslipidemia and inflammation during atherosclerosis is important for developing 
them as therapeutic targets.

(c) 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 18000963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008 Jan-Feb;24(1):14-26.

Thiazolidinediones as anti-inflammatory and anti-atherogenic agents.

Ceriello A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Warwick Medical School, Clinical Sciences Research Institute, University
Hospital, Coventry, Warwickshire, UK. antonio.ceriello@warwick.ac.uk

In the last few years, there has been increasing focus on the impact of
interventions on cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Insulin resistance and hyperglycaemia often co-exist with a cluster of risk
factors for coronary artery disease, but the underlying mechanisms leading to the
development of such vascular complications are complex. The over-production of
free radicals in patients suffering from diabetes results in a state of oxidative
stress, which leads to endothelial dysfunction and a greater risk of
atherosclerosis. Moreover, inflammatory factors which play a critical role in
atherothrombosis and plaque rupture are often found to be at elevated levels in
this patient population. Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are now routinely used to
manage glucose levels, and have been suggested to influence other cardiovascular 
risk factors and therefore the pathways leading to macrovascular events.
Consequently, recent studies have investigated the anti-inflammatory and
anti-atherogenic properties of TZDs. The data available up to the present time,
in the context of the emerging cardiovascular outcome profiles of rosiglitazone
and pioglitazone, will be discussed here.

2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd

PMID: 17990280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Atherosclerosis. 2008 May;198(1):166-73. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Variation in inflammation-related genes and risk of incident nonfatal myocardial 
infarction or ischemic stroke.

Bis JC(1), Heckbert SR, Smith NL, Reiner AP, Rice K, Lumley T, Hindorff LA,
Marciante KD, Enquobahrie DA, Monks SA, Psaty BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 981041, USA.
joshbis@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: From initiation to plaque rupture, immune system components
contribute to atherosclerosis. We investigated variation in inflammation-related 
genes - interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-10, IL-18, and
the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily [lymphotoxin(LT)-alpha, TNF-alpha,
LT-beta] - with respect to nonfatal incident myocardial infarction (MI) or
ischemic stroke risk.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A population-based case-control study recruited
postmenopausal and/or hypertensive Group Health members aged 30-79 years. We
chose a subset of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to describe common
gene-wide variation on the basis of linkage disequilibrium. 36 SNPs, describing
38 common haplotypes for 5 genes and a 3-gene cluster, were genotyped among 856
MI cases, 368 stroke cases, and 2688 controls. Associations of SNPs or
PHASE-inferred haplotypes and risk were estimated using logistic regression;
significance of gene-level associations was assessed with global Wald tests and
permutation tests. Gene-wide IL-18 variation was associated with higher MI risk
and an IL-1B haplotype was associated with lower stroke risk. In secondary
analyses of SNPs, we observed associations of several IL-1B polymorphisms with
risk of MI or stroke. IL-6, CRP, IL-10, and TNF superfamily gene variation was
not associated with MI or stroke risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support prior reports associating an IL-18 gene variant 
and MI risk, contribute additional evidence to reports of IL-1B and
cardiovascular risk, and fail to confirm risk differences previously observed for
CRP, IL-6, and TNF-alpha promoter variants.

PMCID: PMC2517173
PMID: 17981284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Nucl Med. 2007 Nov;48(11):1800-15. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Role of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

Spagnoli LG(1), Bonanno E, Sangiorgi G, Mauriello A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
spagnoli@uniroma2.it

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 2007 Nov;48(11):1753-5.

Inflammation plays a major role in all phases of atherosclerosis. Stable plaques 
are characterized by a chronic inflammatory infiltrate, whereas vulnerable and
ruptured plaques are characterized by an "active" inflammation involved in the
thinning of the fibrous cap, predisposing the plaque to rupture. Although a
single vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque rupture may cause the event, there are
many other types of plaques, several of which are vulnerable. The existence of
multiple types of vulnerable plaques suggests that atherosclerosis is a diffuse
inflammatory process. A current challenge is to identify morphologic and
molecular markers able to discriminate stable plaques from vulnerable ones,
allowing the stratification of patients at high risk for acute cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular events before clinical syndromes develop. With that aim in mind, 
this article summarizes the natural history of atherosclerotic plaques, focusing 
on molecular mechanisms affecting plaque progression and serum markers correlated
with plaque inflammation.

PMID: 17942804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Circulation. 2007 Oct 30;116(18):2043-52. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Synergistic proinflammatory effects of the antiviral cytokine interferon-alpha
and Toll-like receptor 4 ligands in the atherosclerotic plaque.

Niessner A(1), Shin MS, Pryshchep O, Goronzy JJ, Chaikof EL, Weyand CM.

Author information: 
(1)Kathleen B. and Mason I. Lowance Center for Human Immunology, Department of
Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

BACKGROUND: Interferon (IFN)-alpha is a pluripotent inflammatory cytokine
typically induced by viral infections. In rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques, 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells produce IFN-alpha. In the present study we explored 
the contribution of IFN-alpha to inflammation and tissue injury in the plaque
microenvironment.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In 53% of carotid plaques (n=30), CD123+ plasmacytoid
dendritic cells clustered together with CD11c+ myeloid dendritic cells, a
distinct dendritic cell subset specialized in sensing danger signals from
bacteria and tissue breakdown. Tissue concentrations of IFN-alpha and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha transcripts were tightly correlated (r=0.76,
P<0.001), suggesting a regulatory role of IFN-alpha in TNF-alpha production.
Plaque tissue stimulation with CpG ODN, a Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 ligand,
increased IFN-alpha production (57.8+/-23.7 versus 25.9+/-8.6 pg/mL; P<0.001),
whereas the TLR4 ligand lipopolysaccharide induced TNF-alpha secretion
(225.1+/-3.0 versus 0.7+/-0.2 pg/mL; P<0.001). Treating plaque tissue with
IFN-alpha markedly enhanced lipopolysaccharide-triggered TNF-alpha secretion
(559.0+/-25.9 versus 225.1+/-3.0 pg/mL; P<0.001). IFN-alpha pretreatment also
amplified the effects of lipopolysaccharide on interleukin-12, interleukin-23,
and matrix metalloproteinase-9, suggesting that the antiviral cytokine sensitized
myeloid dendritic cells and macrophages toward TLR4 ligands. Mechanistic studies 
demonstrated that IFN-alpha modulated the myeloid dendritic cell response pattern
by upregulating TLR4 expression (P<0.001) involving both the STAT (signal
transducer and activator of transcription) and the PI(3)K pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: In the atherosclerotic plaque, IFN-alpha functions as an
inflammatory amplifier. It sensitizes antigen-presenting cells toward
pathogen-derived TLR4 ligands by upregulating TLR4 expression and intensifies
TNF-alpha, interleukin-12, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 production, all
implicated in plaque destabilization. Thus, IFN-alpha-inducing pathogens, even
when colonizing distant tissue sites, threaten the stability of inflamed
atherosclerotic plaque.

PMID: 17938289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Acta Med Indones. 2007 Apr-Jun;39(2):86-93.

The role of vascular smooth muscle cells on the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

Rudijanto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Brawijaya University,
Malang.

Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death and disability. The lesions of
atherosclerosis represent a series of highly specific cellular and molecular
responses. The earliest changes that precede the formation of lesions of
atherosclerosis take place in the endothelium (EC), with resultant endothelial
dysfunction. The EC-induced injury can result in increased lipid permeability,
macrophage recruitment, formation of foam cells, and recruitment of T-lymphocytes
and platelet. After intimal injury, different cell types,including ECs,
platelets, and inflammatory cells release mediators, such as growth factors and
cytokines that induce multiple effects including phenotype change of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMC) from the quiescent "contractile" phenotype state to
the active "synthetic" state, that can migrate and proliferate from media to the 
intima. The inflammatory response simulates migration and proliferation of VSMC
that become intermixed with the area of inflammation to form an intermediate
lesion. These responses continue uninhibited and is accompanied by accumulation
of new extra cellular matrix (ECM). The migratory and proliferative activities of
VSMC are regulated by growth promoters such as platelet derived growth factors
(PGF), endothelin-1 (ET-1), thrombin, fibroblast growth factor (FGF),
interleukin-1 (IL-1) and inhibitors such as, heparin sulfates , nitric oxide
(NO), transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta. The matrix metallo proteinases
(MMPs) could also participate in the process of VSMC migration. MMPs could
catalyze and remove the basement membrane around VSMC and facilitate contacts
with the interstitial matrix. This could promote a change from quiescent,
contractile VSMC to cells capable of migrating and proliferating to mediate
repair. The VSMC regulation is a very complex process, VSMC are stimulated to
proliferate and migrate by some kind of cytokines, growth factors, angiotensin II
(Ang-II). Together with apoptosis, proliferation and migration of VSMC are vital 
to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and plaque rupture. Rupture of the plaque 
is associated with increased fibrous cap macrophage, increased VSMC apoptosis,
and reduced fibrous cap VSMC. VSMC are the only cells with plaques capable of
synthesizing structurally important collagen isoforms, and the apoptosis of VSMC 
might promote plaque rupture.

PMID: 17933075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 2007 Jun-Jul;100(6-7):554-62.

Understanding the controversy about hormonal replacement therapy: insights from
estrogen effects on experimental and clinical atherosclerosis.

Arnal JF(1), Douin-Echinard V, Tremollières F, Terrisse AD, Sié P, Payrastre B,
Guery JC, Bayard F, Gourdy P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 563, CHU Toulouse-Purpan, Toulouse. arnal@toulouse.inserm.fr

Whereas hormonal replacement/menopause therapy (HRT) in post-menopausal women
increases the coronary artery risk, epidemiological studies (protection in
pre-menopaused women) suggest and experimental studies (prevention of the
development of fatty streaks in animals) demonstrate a major atheroprotective
action of estradiol (E2). The understanding of the deleterious and beneficial
effects of estrogens is thus required. The immuno-inflammatory system plays a key
role in the development of fatty streak deposit as well as in the atherosclerotic
plaque rupture. Whereas E2 favors an anti-inflammatory effect in vitro (cultured 
cells), it rather elicits pro-inflammation in vivo, at the level of several
subpopulations of the immuno-inflammatory system, which could contribute to
plaque destabilization. Endothelium is another important target for E2, since it 
stimulates endothelial NO and prostacyclin production, thus promoting beneficial 
effects of vasorelaxation and platelet aggregation inhibition. Prostacyclin, but 
not NO, appears to be involved in the atheroprotective effect of E2. Estradiol
accelerates also endothelial regrowth, thus favoring vascular healing. Finally,
most of these effects of E2 are mediated by estrogen receptor alpha, and are
independent of estrogen receptor beta. In summary, a better understanding of the 
mechanisms of estrogen action is required not only on the normal and atheromatous
arteries, but also on innate and adaptive immune responses. This should help
cardiovascular disease prevention optimization after menopause. These mouse
models should help to screen existing and future Selective Estrogen Receptor
Modulators (SERMs).

PMID: 17893638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2007 Oct;18(5):527-33.

Effect of shear stress on vascular inflammation and plaque development.

Helderman F(1), Segers D, de Crom R, Hierck BP, Poelmann RE, Evans PC, Krams R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Free University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review describes evidence that shear stress acts through 
modulation of inflammation and by that process affects atherogenesis and plaque
composition.
RECENT FINDINGS: In low shear stress regions antiatherogenic transcription
factors are downregulated and pro-atherogenic transcription factors are
upregulated. Consequently, inflammatory cells may home low shear stress regions
more easily to the plaques because of increased expression of adhesion factors, a
decreased rolling speed and an increased expression of chemokines, thereby
changing the composition of the plaques into a more vulnerable phenotype. In
contrast, in advanced plaque development vascular lumen decreases and shear
stress increases, especially upstream of the plaques. The predominant upstream
location of lipids induces a prevalent upstream location of inflammatory cells
leading to localized plaque rupture.
SUMMARY: Shear stress has been shown to play a role in plaque induction, plaque
progression and plaque rupture. The mechanism for plaque induction seems to
differ from the role of shear stress for plaque rupture, whereby the former
mechanism is induced by low shear stress and the latter by high shear stress.

PMID: 17885423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2007 Oct;18(5):492-9.

Molecular mechanisms of plaque instability.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Burns and Allen
Research Institute and Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center and
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. shahp@cshs.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Coronary artery thrombosis superimposed on a disrupted
atherosclerotic plaque initiates abrupt arterial occlusion and is the proximate
event responsible for 60-80% cases of acute coronary syndromes. This article
provides a concise update on the evolving concepts in the pathophysiology of
plaque rupture and thrombosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past several years, the critical role of plaque
composition rather than plaque size or stenosis severity, in plaque rupture and
thrombosis have been recognized. The necrotic lipid core and plaque inflammation 
appear to be key factors. Extracellular matrix loss in the fibrous cap, a prelude
to rupture, is attributed to matrix degrading enzymes as well as to death of
matrix synthesizing smooth muscle cells; inflammation appears to play a critical 
role in both these processes. Inflammatory cell derived tissue factor is a key
contributor to plaque thrombogenicity. Inflammation has also been implicated in
plaque neovascularity, intraplaque hemorrhage and plaque expansion. Recent
observations have also highlighted the important modulatory role of immune system
in atherosclerosis and plaque composition.
SUMMARY: Improved understanding of mechanisms causing plaque instability should
provide novel insights into prevention of athero-thrombotic cardiovascular
events.

PMID: 17885418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Dec;195(2):e10-8. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

C-reactive protein and atherogenesis: from fatty streak to clinical event.

Bisoendial RJ(1), Kastelein JJ, Stroes ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that arterial inflammation
represents a key feature determining the course of atherogenesis. The consecutive
stages in the evolution of atherosclerotic lesions are respectively, plaque
buildup and growth, and destabilization, predisposing to plaque rupture and
intravascular thrombosis. This chain of events leading from lesion formation to
clinical events has been carefully elucidated during the last three decades.
C-reactive protein (CRP) has been directly implicated in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis. In the present review, we will focus on a potentially causal
role of CRP during the various stages of atherogenesis.

PMID: 17669411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Radiol Med. 2007 Aug;112(5):637-59. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Imaging techniques for the vulnerable coronary plaque.

[Article in English, Italian]

Cademartiri F(1), La Grutta L, Palumbo A, Maffei E, Aldrovandi A, Malagò R,
Alberghina F, Pugliese F, Runza G, Belgrano M, Midiri M, Cova MA, Krestin GP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Radiologia e Dipartimento Cuore, Imaging Cardiovascolare Non
invasivo, Azienda Ospedaliera di Parma, Viale Rustici 2, I-43100 Parma, Italy.
filippocademartiri@hotmail.com

The goal of this article is to illustrate the main invasive and noninvasive
diagnostic modalities to image the vulnerable coronary plaque, which is
responsible for acute coronary syndrome. The main epidemiologic and histological 
issues are briefly discussed in order to provide an adequate background.
Comprehensive coronary atherosclerosis imaging should involve visualization of
the entire coronary artery tree and plaque characterization, including
three-dimensional morphology, relationship with the lumen, composition, vascular 
remodelling and presence of inflammation. No single technique provides such a
comprehensive description, and no available modality extensively identifies the
vulnerable plaque. In particular, we describe multislice computed tomography,
which at present seems to be the most promising noninvasive tool for an
exhaustive image-based quantification of coronary atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17653628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2007 Jul-Aug;16(4):191-202. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Viral serpin, Serp-1, inhibits endogenous angiogenesis in the chicken
chorioallantoic membrane model.

Richardson M(1), Liu L, Dunphy L, Wong D, Sun Y, Viswanathan K, Singh G, Lucas A.

Author information: 
(1)Juravinski Cancer Centre, Department of Pathology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is a critical factor in the development of malignant
tumors, in arthritic joints, and in cardiovascular disease. In cardiovascular
disease, angiogenesis is recognised both as a potential therapy and as a
complicating factor in atherosclerotic plaque rupture and thrombotic obstruction.
Serine proteases regulate thrombosis, inflammation, and cell invasion, events
that trigger various stages of angiogenesis and are in turn regulated by
inhibitors, termed serpins. Serp-1 is a secreted anti-inflammatory viral serpin
that profoundly inhibits early mononuclear cell invasion, and the development of 
atherosclerosis, transplant vasculopathy, and arthritis in a range of animal
models.
METHODS: The capacity of Serp-1 to alter angiogenesis was evaluated in the
chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model using morphometric analysis of
vascular changes and RT-PCR to explore alterations in gene expression.
RESULTS: Serp-1 inhibited endogenous angiogenesis in a dose-dependent manner,
with associated altered expression of laminin and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF). Serp-1 was ineffective in CAMs no longer in the rapid growth
phase. Similar inhibition of angiogenesis was detected after inhibition of VEGF, 
but not after treatment with the inactivated reactive center loop mutant of
Serp-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The angiogenic process can be controlled using Serp-1, an
anti-inflammatory agent that is effective at low concentrations with rapid
reversibility, targets endothelial cells, and reduces the availability of VEGF.
These properties may be especially important in cardiovascular disease, reducing 
plaque destabilization. It is likely that the anti-angiogenic activity of Serp-1 
contributes to the observed anti-inflammatory and anti-atherogenic actions with
potential importance in this therapeutic setting.

PMID: 17637427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Sep;43(3):272-80. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Pathological mechanisms and dose dependency of erythrocyte-induced vulnerability 
of atherosclerotic plaques.

Lin HL(1), Xu XS, Lu HX, Zhang L, Li CJ, Tang MX, Sun HW, Liu Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China.

To test our hypothesis that erythrocytes may induce plaque vulnerability and
investigate the mechanism involved, we established a novel model of intraplaque
hemorrhage in 56 New Zealand white rabbits with established plaques. Three
distinct abdominal aortic plaques with similar thickness were identified in each 
rabbit with use of intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging. Rabbits were equally 
divided into 4 groups depending on dosage of treatment; with the guidance of
IVUS, one of the three plaques from each rabbit was injected from adventitia with
autologous erythrocytes (RBC) or cholesterol (CH) for the following groups: RBC, 
50 microL or 100 microL, and CH, 50 microL or 100 microL. One of the other two
plaques in each rabbit received an equal volume of normal saline (NS) and one
received no injection. Plaques in the 100 microL RBC group had a higher plaque
rupture rate than its respective NS or blank controls plaques (57.1% vs. 14.3% or
14.3%, P<0.05). Plaques from the RBC or cholesterol groups showed,
dose-dependently, more macrophage infiltration, more superoxide and lipid
content, thinner plaque fibrous cap, higher mRNA level of MCP-1, IL-1 or
IFN-gamma and higher vulnerability index than controls, especially in the RBC
group. Thus, erythrocyte treatment can dose-dependently induce the vulnerability 
of plaques. Accumulation of lipid content and augmentation of oxidative stress
and inflammation in the plaques are the probable pathological mechanisms
involved.

PMID: 17628589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. MAGMA. 2007 Jun;20(3):129-42. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Biomarkers of atherosclerosis and the potential of MRI for the diagnosis of
vulnerable plaque.

Canet-Soulas E(1), Letourneur D.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lyon 1, ESCPE, Laboratoire CREATIS-LRMN, CNRS UMR 5220, INSERM
U630, Domaine Scientifique de la Doua, 43 Bd 11 novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne
Cedex, France. emmanuelle.canet@univ-lyon1.fr

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory vascular disease. As it is an
inflammation process, many cellular and molecular events are involved at each
step of the progression of atherosclerosis from an early fatty streak lesion to a
highly dangerous rupture-prone plaque. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a
well-established diagnostic tool for many kinds of chronic inflammation in
various systems and organs, and recent improvements in spatial resolution and
contrast strategies make it a promising technique for the characterization of
inflammatory vessel walls. The first part of this review will briefly introduce
the main cellular and molecular processes involved in atherosclerotic lesions;
the second part will focus on the use of high-resolution MRI and
present-generation contrast agents for plaque characterization; and the third
part will present some recent and ongoing cellular and molecular MRI studies of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17605060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Curr Pharm Des. 2007;13(16):1685-91.

Platelets in atherothrombosis: new and evolving roles.

Weyrich A(1), Cipollone F, Mezzetti A, Zimmerman G.

Author information: 
(1)Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The functional interplay of platelets with leukocytes and endothelial cells is
critical both in physiological conditions, such as host defense, wound repair and
tissue healing, and in pathological conditions, such as thrombotic and
inflammatory diseases. The understanding of the specific molecular links
underlying these cellular interactions and the functional changes that they
induce could suggest new targets for pharmacological intervention. In this
review, we summarize some of the newly-recognized aspects of interaction between 
platelets and monocytes, neutrophils and endothelial cells, that are relevant to 
all of the phases of atherosclerosis progression, since the early steps of
atherogenesis to plaque rupture and thrombosis, the main causes of acute coronary
syndromes.

PMID: 17584098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Thromb Haemost. 2007 Jun;97(6):873-9.

Vasa vasorum and atherosclerosis - Quid novi?

Langheinrich AC(1), Kampschulte M, Buch T, Bohle RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Giessen, Department of Radiology, Giessen, Germany.
Alexander.Langheinrich@radiol.med.uni-giessen.de

The role of vasa vasorum (VV) in atherosclerosis is hotly debated, and new
experimental techniques have recently opened an opportunity to take a fresh look 
at this important topic. Although the proliferation of VV due to atherogenic
stimuli is controversial, experimental and clinical evidence strongly suggest the
potential of VV in vascular proliferative disorders. In the past, paradigms of
atherosclerosis and restenosis have excluded the adventitia and VV in the artery 
wall due, in part, to a lack of i) appropriate animal models featuring
adventitial VV neovascularization, ii) imaging technologies to quantitate
adventitial VV and plaque neovascularization and iii) its consequences,
concerning information on detectable plaque substrate in vulnerable lesions. VV
proliferation is associated with increasing plaque burden and is linked to
cellular processes which are critical during the development of atherosclerotic
plaques such as inflammation, plaque perfusion and concomitant intraplaque
hemorrhage - but the regulation and induction of VV based on pathological
settings are poorly understood. This review discusses the current scientific
status and its controversies and identifies open research questions.

PMID: 17549287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2007 May-Jun;16(3):136-43. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

HMGB1 expression by activated vascular smooth muscle cells in advanced human
atherosclerosis plaques.

Inoue K(1), Kawahara K, Biswas KK, Ando K, Mitsudo K, Nobuyoshi M, Maruyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation plays a key role in atherogenesis, which is
followed by atheromatous plaque instability. High-mobility group box 1 is
released by activated macrophages as a late-phase mediator during prolonged
inflammation. However, the expression of high-mobility group box 1 and its effect
on the production of C-reactive protein and matrix metalloproteinases,
particularly on human vascular smooth muscle cells, still remain unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical studies revealed that high-mobility
group box 1 was abundantly expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells of carotid
and coronary atheromatous plaques, but not in atrophic vascular smooth muscle
cells of fibrous plaques and normal medial vascular smooth muscle cells. Receptor
for advanced glycation end products was also detected in vascular smooth muscle
cells positive for high-mobility group box 1. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle
cells positive for high-mobility group box 1 were found to express both
C-reactive protein and matrix metalloproteinases (2, 3, and 9). Administration of
exogenous high-mobility group box 1 to cultured vascular smooth muscle cells
caused a marked elevation of C-reactive protein mRNA by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and of C-reactive protein levels by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Conversely, C-reactive protein also triggered 
a significant release of high-mobility group box 1 in vascular smooth muscle cell
culture medium as determined by immunoblot.
CONCLUSIONS: Activated vascular smooth muscle cells are the source of
high-mobility group box 1 in human advanced atherosclerotic lesions.
High-mobility group box 1 directly stimulates the production of both C-reactive
protein and matrix metalloproteinase through receptor for advanced glycation end 
product. These findings provide new evidence that high-mobility group box 1
produced by activated vascular smooth muscle cells may contribute to the
progression and vulnerability of human atherosclerotic lesions toward rupture.

PMID: 17502242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2007 Jun;34 Suppl 1:S1-8.

Targeting of matrix metalloproteinase activation for noninvasive detection of
vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions.

Hartung D(1), Schäfers M, Fujimoto S, Levkau B, Narula N, Kopka K, Virmani R,
Reutelingsperger C, Hofstra L, Kolodgie FD, Petrov A, Narula J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammation plays an important role in vulnerability of
atherosclerotic plaques to rupture and hence acute coronary events. The
monocyte-macrophage infiltration in plaques leads to upregulation of cytokines
and metalloproteinase enzymes. Matrix metalloproteinases result in matrix
dissolution and consequently expansive remodeling of the vessel. They also
contribute to attenuation of fibrous cap and hence susceptibility to rupture.
Assessment of metalloproteinase expression and activity should provide
information about plaque instability.

PMID: 17497106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Dec;195(2):236-41. Epub 2007 May 9.

Significance of characterization of non-culprit lesions: an underscored clinical 
problem.

Toutouzas K(1), Drakopoulou M, Vaina S, Stefanadis C.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Cardiology, Athens Medical School, Hippokration Hospital, 
Greece. ktoutouz@otenet.gr

Sudden death or acute coronary syndromes are frequently the first manifestation
of plaque rupture at non-culprit lesions. Thus, identification of high-risk
non-culprit plaques may have significant impact on the prognosis of patients with
coronary artery disease. At present a widely accepted diagnostic method to
prospectively identify such 'high-risk' plaques is not available. Improved
identification of high-risk plaques by novel imaging coronary modalities
currently available is a goal of great importance since it will result in major
decreases in coronary artery disease morbidity and mortality. Potential new
treatments with systemic, regional, and local approaches have been proposed. In
this review article we focus on common and different morphologic characteristics 
between culprit and non-culprit lesions, the natural history of non-culprit
lesions, and potential methods to identify the high-risk lesions for future
adverse cardiovascular events.

PMID: 17490671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Front Biosci. 2007 May 1;12:4132-56.

Genetically-engineered animals as research models for atherosclerosis: their use 
for the characterization of PPAR agonists in the treatment of cardiometabolic
disorders.

Fievet C(1), Fruchart JC, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Lille, Departement d'Atherosclerose, Lille, F-59019
France. Catherine.Fievet@pasteur-lille.fr

Experimental approaches to understand the pathogenesis and to develop treatments 
of atherosclerosis involve studies in animal and cellular models. However,
relevant animal models are rare since atherosclerosis is a disease that naturally
affects only humans and one or two other species (pigs and certain primates). For
a long time, atherosclerosis studies were carried out using diet-induced
atherosclerosis models, even though the diets were unphysiological and the
arterial lesions that developed were often limited in size, composition and
location. During the last decade, with the advent of molecular genetics and
genetic manipulation techniques, the development of genetically-engineered
animals, mainly mice, allowed an explosion in the number of models resulting in a
tremendous progress in atherosclerosis research and enhancement of our
understanding of the disease. Atherosclerosis is a multifactorial disease which
normally develops very slowly and asymptomatically during several decades,
leading to atheromatous plaque formation. Once the plaque is weakened, its
rupture or erosion induces severe clinical complications, such as myocardial
infarction or cerebrovascular accidents. Several risk factors predispose to
atherosclerosis including hypertension and abnormalities in lipoprotein
metabolism and glucose homeostasis. The formation of the atherosclerotic lesion
is a complex process, characterized by the presence of lipid-laden
monocyte-derived macrophages (called foam cells), establishing therefore a status
of chronic inflammation. The dysregulated expression of genes encoding proteins
involved in the control of metabolic pathways contributes to vascular
inflammation and the development of atherosclerosis. The expression of these
genes is controlled by different transcription factors amongst which are the
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor (PPAR) family of nuclear receptors.
This review focuses on the use of genetically-engineered animals as models for
experimental atherosclerosis research, pointing out their contribution to
investigate the implication of PPARs and their ligands in regulating metabolic
and inflammatory abnormalities predisposing to atherosclerosis development.

PMID: 17485363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Ann Surg Innov Res. 2007 Feb 21;1:4.

Non-invasive MR imaging of inflammation in a patient with both asymptomatic
carotid atheroma and an abdominal aortic aneurysm: a case report.

Howarth SP(1), Tang TY, Graves MJ, U-King-Im JM, Li ZY, Walsh SR, Gaunt ME,
Gillard JH.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Radiology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. simonh@radiol.cam.ac.uk

Inflammation is a recognized risk factor for the vulnerable atherosclerotic
plaque. USPIO-enhanced MRI imaging is a promising non-invasive method to identify
high-risk atheromatous plaque inflammation in vivo in humans, in which areas of
focal signal loss on MR images have been shown to correspond to the location of
activated macrophages, typically at the shoulder regions of the plaque. This is
the first report in humans describing simultaneous USPIO uptake within atheroma
in two different arterial territories and again emphasises that atherosclerosis
is a truly systemic disease. With further work, USPIO-enhanced MR imaging may be 
useful in identifying inflamed vulnerable atheromatous plaques in vivo, so
refining patient selection for intervention and allowing appropriate early
aggressive pharmacotherapy to prevent plaque rupture.

PMCID: PMC1839766
PMID: 17411449  [PubMed]


408. Clin Chim Acta. 2007 May;381(1):14-20. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

New biochemical markers: from bench to bedside.

Zaninotto M(1), Mion MM, Novello E, Altinier S, Plebani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University-Hospital of Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Evaluation of patients presenting to hospital with chest pain or
other signs or symptoms suggesting acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is problematic, 
time-consuming and sometimes expensive, even if new biochemical markers, such as 
troponins, have improved the ability to detect cardiac injury. However, patients 
with normal troponin values are not necessarily risk-free for major cardiac
events.
METHODS: Recent investigations indicate that the overall patient risk may be
assessed earlier than before, thanks to new knowledge acquired concerning the
pathobiology of atherosclerosis and molecular events involved in the progression 
of disease, thus allowing the development of new biochemical markers. Some
selected markers are released during the different phases of development of
cardiovascular disease and may be useful for the diagnosis of patients with
cardiovascular disease. In particular, the identification of emerging markers
that provide relevant information on the inflammatory process, and the
development of biomarkers whose circulating concentrations suggest the status of 
plaque instability and rupture, seems to be of particular value in prognosis and 
risk stratification. The overall expectations for a cardiovascular biochemical
marker are not only its biological plausibility but also the availability at a
reasonable cost of rapid, high quality assays, and their correct interpretation
by clinicians using optimal cut-offs.
CONCLUSION: The crossing from bench to bedside for each new marker discovered,
must be associated with concurrent advances in the characterization of analytical
features and the development of routine assay, in the assessment of analytical
performance and in interpretative reporting of test results as well as in the
training of physicians to use the array of biomarkers available appropriately and
to interpret them correctly. This approach calls for the coordinated support of
clinicians, technology experts, statisticians and the industry so that new
biochemical developments can be of optimal value.

PMID: 17400202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2007 Mar;33(2):151-8.

Where is the trace? Molecular imaging of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques.

Langer H(1), Schönberger T, Bigalke B, Gawaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik III, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
harald.langer@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Serious cardiovascular events frequently arise from rupture of vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaques. Not infrequently, these plaques are clinically silent
and suddenly cause acute complications such as myocardial infarction, which in a 
high percentage are fatal. Thus, identifying individual patients with vulnerable 
plaques at high risk for plaque rupture is a central challenge in clinical
medicine. This review highlights noninvasive scintigraphic techniques, which use 
radiolabeled molecules to detect functional aspects in atherosclerotic plaques by
visualizing their biological activity. One major principle is the molecular
imaging of inflammation with radionuclide tracers, including detection of
metabolic activity, chemotaxis, cell recruitment, and lipoprotein enrichment.
Additional studies focus on visualization of apoptosis, angiogenesis, or
proteolysis. A central feature of plaque vulnerability is its thrombogenicity.
Therefore, detection of thrombogenic plaques is another promising principle of
molecular imaging. If a reliable protocol to image vulnerable plaques, which are 
prone to rupture, can be established and introduced into clinical practice, the
required measures such as atheroprotective medication or revascularization could 
be undertaken to prevent serious cardiovascular events.

PMID: 17340463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007 Jun;6(6):1088-102. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Proteomics analysis of human coronary atherosclerotic plaque: a feasibility study
of direct tissue proteomics by liquid chromatography and tandem mass
spectrometry.

Bagnato C(1), Thumar J, Mayya V, Hwang SI, Zebroski H, Claffey KP, Haudenschild
C, Eng JK, Lundgren DH, Han DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Vascular Biology, University of
Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

Cardiovascular disease presents significant variations in human populations with 
respect to the atherosclerotic plaque progression, inflammation, thrombosis, and 
rupture. To gain a more comprehensive picture of the pathogenic mechanism of
atherosclerosis and the variations seen in patients, efficient methods to
identify proteins from the normal and diseased arteries need to be developed. To 
accomplish this goal, we tested the feasibility and efficiency of protein
identification by a recently developed method, termed direct tissue proteomics
(DTP). We analyzed frozen and paraformaldehyde-fixed archival coronary arteries
with the DTP method. We also validated the distinct expression of four proteins
by immunohistochemistry. In addition, we demonstrated the compatibility of the
DTP method with laser capture microdissection and the possibility of monitoring
specific cytokines and growth factors by the absolute quantification of abundance
method. Major findings from this feasibility study are that 1) DTP can be used to
efficiently identify proteins from paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded, and
frozen coronary arteries; 2) approximately twice the number of proteins were
identified from the frozen sections when compared with the paraformaldehyde-fixed
sections; 3) laser capture microdissection is compatible with DTP; and 4)
detection of low abundance cytokines and growth factors in the coronary arteries 
required selective reaction monitoring experiments coupled to absolute
quantification of abundance. The analysis of 35 human coronary atherosclerotic
samples allowed identification of a total of 806 proteins. The present study
provides the first large scale proteomics map of human coronary atherosclerotic
plaques.

PMID: 17339633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Biomed Eng Online. 2007 Mar 1;6:8.

Calculation of arterial wall temperature in atherosclerotic arteries: effect of
pulsatile flow, arterial geometry, and plaque structure.

Ley O(1), Kim T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843, USA. oley@tamu.edu

BACKGROUND: This paper presents calculations of the temperature distribution in
an atherosclerotic plaque experiencing an inflammatory process; it analyzes the
presence of hot spots in the plaque region and their relationship to blood flow, 
arterial geometry, and inflammatory cell distribution. Determination of the
plaque temperature has become an important topic because plaques showing a
temperature inhomogeneity have a higher likelihood of rupture. As a result,
monitoring plaque temperature and knowing the factors affecting it can help in
the prevention of sudden rupture.
METHODS: The transient temperature profile in inflamed atherosclerotic plaques is
calculated by solving an energy equation and the Navier-Stokes equations in 2D
idealized arterial models of a bending artery and an arterial bifurcation. For
obtaining the numerical solution, the commercial package COMSOL 3.2 was used. The
calculations correspond to a parametric study where arterial type and size, as
well as plaque geometry and composition, are varied. These calculations are used 
to analyze the contribution of different factors affecting arterial wall
temperature measurements. The main factors considered are the metabolic heat
production of inflammatory cells, atherosclerotic plaque length lp, inflammatory 
cell layer length lmp, and inflammatory cell layer thickness dmp.
RESULTS: The calculations indicate that the best location to perform the
temperature measurement is at the back region of the plaque (0.5 < or = l/lp < or
= 0.7). The location of the maximum temperature, or hot spot, at the plaque
surface can move during the cardiac cycle depending on the arterial geometry and 
is a direct result of the blood flow pattern. For the bending artery, the hot
spot moves 0.6 millimeters along the longitudinal direction; for the arterial
bifurcation, the hot spot is concentrated at a single location due to the flow
recirculation observed at both ends of the plaque. Focusing on the thermal
history of different points selected at the plaque surface, it is seen that
during the cardiac cycle the temperature at a point located at l/lp = 0.7 can
change between 0.5 and 0.1 degrees Celsius for the bending artery, while no
significant variation is observed in the arterial bifurcation. Calculations
performed for different values of inflammatory cell layer thickness dmp indicate 
the same behavior reported experimentally; that corresponds to an increase in the
maximum temperature observed, which for the bending artery ranges from 0.6 to 2.0
degrees Celsius, for dmp = 25 and 100 micrometers, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that direct temperature measurements should be
taken (1) as close as possible to the plaque/lumen surface, as the calculations
show a significant drop in temperature within 120 micrometers from the plaque
surface; (2) in the presence of blood flow, temperature measurement should be
performed in the downstream edge of the plaque, as it shows higher temperature
independently of the arterial geometry; and (3) it is necessary to perform
measurements at a sampling rate that is higher than the cardiac cycle; the
measurement should be extended through several cardiac cycles, as variations of
up to 0.7 degrees Celsius were observed at l/lp = 0.7 for the bending artery.

PMCID: PMC1838421
PMID: 17331253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Circ Res. 2007 Mar 30;100(6):884-93. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Monocyte/macrophage suppression in CD11b diphtheria toxin receptor transgenic
mice differentially affects atherogenesis and established plaques.

Stoneman V(1), Braganza D, Figg N, Mercer J, Lang R, Goddard M, Bennett M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Mar 30;100(6):751-3.

Although monocytes/macrophages are considered important in atherogenesis, their
role in established plaques is unclear. For example, macrophage content is
associated with plaque instability, but their loss through cell death is observed
at sites of plaque rupture. To examine the role of monocytes/macrophages in
atherosclerosis, we developed CD11b-diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor (DTR)
transgenic mice, whereby administration of DT selectively kills
monocytes/macrophages. DT treatment reduced peripheral blood monocytes and tissue
macrophages and inhibited macrophage function in CD11b-DTR mice and
apolipoprotein E-null (apoE(-/-)) mice transplanted with CD11b-DTR bone marrow.
In atherogenesis experiments, DT markedly reduced plaque development and altered 
plaque composition, reducing collagen content and necrotic core formation. In
mice with established plaques, acute DT treatment induced macrophage apoptosis
and reduced macrophage content but did not induce plaque inflammation,
thrombosis, or rupture. Furthermore, despite a 50% reduction in monocytes,
chronic DT treatment of these mice did not alter plaque extent or composition,
most likely because of ongoing recruitment/proliferation of monocytes with
recovery of macrophage content. We conclude that monocytes/macrophages are
critical to atherogenesis, but established plaques are more resistant to
reductions in monocytes.

PMCID: PMC2040259
PMID: 17322176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Hypertension. 2007 Apr;49(4):784-91. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Morning blood pressure surge as a destabilizing factor of atherosclerotic plaque:
role of ubiquitin-proteasome activity.

Marfella R(1), Siniscalchi M, Portoghese M, Di Filippo C, Ferraraccio F,
Schiattarella C, Crescenzi B, Sangiuolo P, Ferraro G, Siciliano S, Cinone F,
Mazzarella G, Martis S, Verza M, Coppola L, Rossi F, D'Amico M, Paolisso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric and Metabolic Diseases, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. raffaele.marfella@unina2.it

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2007 Apr;49(4):771-2.

Whether morning blood pressure surge influences the molecular mechanisms of
plaque progression toward instability is not known. Recently, we have
demonstrated enhanced activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in human
plaques and evidenced that it is associated with inflammatory-induced plaque
rupture. We evaluated the inflammatory infiltration and ubiquitin-proteasome
activity in asymptomatic carotid plaques of hypertensive patients with different 
patterns of morning blood pressure surge. Plaques were obtained from 32
hypertensive patients without morning blood pressure surge and 28 with morning
blood pressure surge enlisted to undergo carotid endarterectomy for extracranial 
high-grade (>70%) internal carotid artery stenosis. Plaques were analyzed for
macrophages, T-lymphocytes, human leukocyte antigen-DR+cells,
ubiquitin-proteasome activity, nuclear factor-kappaB, inhibitor kB-beta, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha, nitrotyrosine, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and collagen
content (immunohistochemistry and ELISA). Compared with plaques obtained from
hypertensive patients without morning blood pressure surge, plaques from with
morning blood pressure surge had more macrophages, T-lymphocytes, human leukocyte
antigen-DR+cells (P<0.001), ubiquitin-proteasome activity, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, nuclear factor-kB (P<0.001), nitrotyrosine, and matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (P<0.01), along with a lesser collagen content and IkB-beta
levels (P<0.001). Enhanced ubiquitin-proteasome activity in atherosclerotic
lesions of patients with morning blood pressure surge is associated with
inflammatory-dependent unstable plaque phenotype. These data suggest a potential 
interplay between morning blood pressure surge and ubiquitin-proteasome activity 
in atherosclerosis pathophysiology.

PMID: 17309948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Circulation. 2007 Feb 27;115(8):972-80. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Increased expression of visfatin in macrophages of human unstable carotid and
coronary atherosclerosis: possible role in inflammation and plaque
destabilization.

Dahl TB(1), Yndestad A, Skjelland M, Øie E, Dahl A, Michelsen A, Damås JK,
Tunheim SH, Ueland T, Smith C, Bendz B, Tonstad S, Gullestad L, Frøland SS,
Krohg-Sørensen K, Russell D, Aukrust P, Halvorsen B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet
Medical Center and University of Oslo, N-0027 Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Although the participation of inflammation in atherogenesis is widely
recognized, the identification of the different components has not been
clarified. In particular, the role of inflammation in plaque destabilization is
not fully understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Our main findings were as follows: (1) In a microarray
experiment, we identified visfatin, one of the most recently identified
adipokines, as a gene that was markedly enhanced in carotid plaques from
symptomatic compared with plaques from asymptomatic individuals. This finding was
confirmed when carotid plaques from 7 patients with asymptomatic and 14 patients 
with symptomatic lesions were examined with real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction. (2) Immunohistochemistry showed that visfatin was
localized in areas that were rich in lipid-loaded macrophages. (3) The
relationship between visfatin and unstable lesions was also found in patients
with coronary artery disease, demonstrating a strong visfatin immunostaining in
lipid-rich regions within the material obtained at the site of plaque rupture in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction. (4) Both oxidized low-density
lipoprotein and tumor necrosis factor-alpha increased visfatin expression in
THP-1 monocytes, with a particularly enhancing effect when these stimuli were
combined. (5) Visfatin increased matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity in THP-1
monocytes and tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-8 levels in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells. Both of these effects were abolished when insulin
receptor signaling was blocked.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that visfatin should be regarded as an
inflammatory mediator, localized to foam cell macrophages within unstable
atherosclerotic lesions, that potentially plays a role in plaque destabilization.

PMID: 17283255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Nucl Med. 2007 Feb;48(2):227-33.

Characterization of plaques using 18F-FDG PET/CT in patients with carotid
atherosclerosis and correlation with matrix metalloproteinase-1.

Wu YW(1), Kao HL, Chen MF, Lee BC, Tseng WY, Jeng JS, Tzen KY, Yen RF, Huang PJ, 
Yang WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Erratum in
    J Nucl Med. 2007 Sep;48(9):1430.

High tissue matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity has been associated with
advanced atherosclerosis and plaque rupture. 18F-FDG uptake has been reported to 
detect inflammation. This investigation examined the vascular 18F-FDG uptake by
PET/CT and its correlation with circulating MMP-1 levels.METHODS: We examined 25 
consecutive patients with significant carotid stenosis and 22 healthy control
subjects using 18F-FDG PET/CT. The leukocyte counts, C-reactive protein (CRP),
and MMP-1 were measured.
RESULTS: 18F-FDG arterial uptake, as well as calcifications, was significantly
higher in extensive distributions in patients with established carotid stenosis. 
However, their distribution was not consistently overlapping. The values of
circulating MMP-1 and leukocyte counts were significantly higher in patients with
carotid stenosis (all P < 0.05). In addition, subjects with higher 18F-FDG uptake
(maximum SUV > 2.0) in target lesions had higher baseline and poststenting MMP-1 
levels (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: We provide a link between 18F-FDG uptake and circulating MMP-1.
18F-FDG PET/CT could be used as an adjunct to the clinical management of
high-risk atherosclerosis and an in vivo tool to study plaque biology.

PMID: 17268019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Exp Mol Pathol. 2007 Aug;83(1):11-6. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Increased expression of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins in atherosclerotic
plaques of symptomatic patients with carotid stenosis.

Moran EP(1), Agrawal DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine,
Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Vascular remodeling and atheromatous lesion formation are determined in part by
the balance between apoptosis and survival of vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs). In the chronic stages, apoptosis of VSMCs in the atherosclerotic plaques
contributes to the weakening and potential rupture of the plaque causing
pathologies such as acute coronary syndrome. The higher incidence of apoptosis in
the plaques of symptomatic than in asymptomatic patients has been demonstrated,
but the expression of survival proteins, including the inhibitor of apoptosis
proteins (IAPs), has not been thoroughly examined. The aim of this study was to
investigate the immunohistochemical expression of cellular inhibitor of apoptosis
protein-2 (cIAP2), x-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), and survivin
in normal carotid arteries, and carotid endarterectomy specimens of symptomatic
and asymptomatic patients with carotid stenosis. The results demonstrated
stronger immunopositivity to smooth muscle myosin heavy chain antigen (SM-MHC)
(sm2), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), and p50 subunit of NF-kappabeta
in the asymptomatic plaques than in symptomatic plaques. Furthermore, there was
higher expression of cIAP2, XIAP, and survivin in the symptomatic than in the
asymptomatic plaques and this paralleled caspase-3 expression. The increased
expression of IAPs in symptomatic plaques could be due to endogenous defense
mechanism to protect against the pro-apoptotic effect of the inflammatory stimuli
that are released in the plaques. This could be involved in the stabilization of 
symptomatic atheromatous plaques and may prove a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC2745193
PMID: 17208224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2007;7 Spec No 1:5-8.

[Statins and antiplatelet agents: complementary mechanisms of action at the
coronary artery level].

[Article in French]

Chapman J(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR S 551, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Hôpital de la
Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75651 Paris, France.

Atherothrombotic lesions associate atherosclerosis with a thrombotic reaction;
they result from a complex inflammatory response to multifactorial stress.
Endothelial dysfunction, lipid accumulation in the arterial intima, the
recruitment of circulating monocytes and differentiation into macrophages and
then foam cells, and an inflammatory reaction, all participate in the genesis of 
atheromatous plaque. The lipid core and fibrous parts of the plaque then
contribute to its progression towards stenosis as a result of lipid infiltration,
an accumulation of foam cells and the proliferation of smooth muscle cells with
the synthesis of extracellular matrix. Atheromatous plaque is likely to rupture. 
The inflammatory components and an accumulation of cholesterol are two important 
characteristics found in the event of plaque rupture. The importance of the
incorporation of thrombotic material formed during a silent rupture should also
be emphasised. Among the factors favouring plaque rupture, a distinction can be
made between extrinsic factors such as hypertension, and intrinsic factors which 
reflect the vulnerability of the plaque in terms of its quantitative aspects
(relative composition in lipids and fibrous tissues) and qualitative
characteristics (solidity of the fibrous cap and proteins in the extracellular
matrix, the degradation of which is controlled by metalloproteinases). In the
prevention of atherothrombosis-related complications, statins and platelet
inhibitors have complementary mechanisms of action. Statins reduce inflammation, 
modify the composition of atheromatous plaque and promote stabilisation, while
acetylsalicylic acid reduces the formation of thrombin, exerts an anti-thrombotic
action, reduces endothelial dysfunction and the proliferation of vascular smooth 
muscle cells, and, like statins, has an anti-inflammatory effect. As a result, in
the context of the B.A.S.I.C. strategy recommended by 2002-2003 ESC guidelines,
the fixed statin-acetylsalicylic acid combination appears to constitute a logical
combination in coronary patients in order to prevent the clinical complications
linked to atherothrombosis.

PMID: 19839181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Am J Cardiol. 2006 Dec 18;98(12A):3Q-9Q. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

Atherosclerosis: disease biology affecting the coronary vasculature.

Libby P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School and Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. plibby@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

The concept of the vulnerable plaque has generated much interest and stimulated a
quest to develop diagnostic modalities to identify potentially unstable
atherosclerotic plaques. However, accumulating clinical data now suggest that
multiple vulnerable plaques coexist in a single coronary tree and that
inflammation is a critical determinant of the stability of plaques. Inflammatory 
mediators, such as cytokines, can influence several biologic processes that
regulate stability of the plaque's fibrous cap and its resistance to rupture.
Thus, the quest for strategies to identify and target treatment to a single
culprit lesion seriously underestimates the complexity of the clinical biology of
thrombosis in atherosclerotic arteries. For the optimum management of our
patients, we must now also consider the vulnerable artery, the vulnerable
arterial bed, and ultimately, the vulnerable patient. Treatment of vulnerable
patients should include measures to stabilize plaques and to lessen the
thrombotic consequences of plaque disruptions.

PMID: 17169627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Kardiologiia. 2006;46(11):9-15.

[Neoangiogenesis and coronary atherosclerosis: diagnostic value of a novel
biochemical marker placenta growth factor in patients with ischemic heart
disease].

[Article in Russian]

Shevchenko AO, Shevchenko OP, Orlova OV, Tulikov MV.

BACKGROUND: Placenta growth factor (PlGF), a member of the vascular endothelial
growth factor family, promotes neoarteriogenesis and triggers intraplaque
inflammation thereby stimulating atherosclerotic plaque progression and plaque
rupture.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate prognostic significance of circulating placenta growth 
factor (PlGF) in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients.
METHODS: 78 patients, aged 44-81 years (mean age 61.6+/-13.1 years) with acute
myocardial infarction (AMI) (n=19), unstable angina (UA) (n=23), stable effort
angina (n=23), and with no evidence of CAD (n=13) were followed-up for at least
48 months. Death, AMI, any revascularization, and hospitalization for UA or
progressive effort angina were considered as end points. Plasma levels of PlGF,
C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), neopterin, tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-a), haptoglobin and homocysteine were measured at primary admission.
RESULTS: During follow up (617+/-263 days) 3 deaths, 1 nonfatal AMI, 4 UA, and 7 
angina progression related hospitalizations occurred. Mean event-free survival
periods differed significantly between subgroups of patients with low (<7.5
pg/ml), medium (7.5-20.5 pg/ml), and high (>20.5 pg/ml) PlGF levels (1038+/-56,
729+/-55, and 578+/-63 days, respectively). Logrank survival in patients with low
PlGF was significantly better than in high PlGF subgroup (p=0.038). PlGF levels
did not correlate with age, lipid levels, blood pressure and smoking. A
significant positive correlation was found between PlGF and haptoglobin (r=0.34, 
p=0.028), homocysteine (r=0.455, p=0.044), neopterin (r=0.31, p=0.048), and
carotid intima-media thickness.
CONCLUSION: Elevated PlGF plasma levels predict worse prognosis in CAD patients; 
PlGF levels correlate with haptoglobin, neopterin, and homocysteine blood levels 
and with the carotid artery intima-media thickness.

PMID: 17159877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Nephrol. 2006;26(6):531-5. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

The emerging role of vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis in atherosclerosis and
plaque stability.

Clarke M(1), Bennett M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Accelerated atherosclerosis is both a cause and a consequence of chronic renal
failure. Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are an important component of
atherosclerotic plaques, responsible for promoting plaque stability in advanced
lesions. In contrast, VSMC apoptosis has been implicated in a number of
deleterious consequences of atherosclerosis, including plaque rupture, vessel
remodelling, co- agulation, inflammation and calcification. Although VSMC
apoptosis occurs in association with these processes, its precise contribution to
these diseases is unknown, given that apoptosis frequently accompanies vessel
injury or alterations to flow. Using transgenic mice with selective induction of 
VSMC apoptosis, a recent study has precisely determined the direct consequences
of VSMC apoptosis in both normal vessels and atherosclerotic plaques.
Surprisingly, normal arteries can withstand huge cell losses with little change
in active or passive properties. Normal vessels demonstrate highly efficient
clearance of apoptotic bodies, even in the absence of professional phagocytes. In
contrast, VSMC apoptosis alone is sufficient to induce multiple features of
vulnerability to rupture in plaques. This study identifies VSMC apoptosis as a
critical process determining plaque stability and thus the most important
consequence of atherosclerosis, plaque rupture.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17159340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2006 Dec;20(6):539-48.

Understanding the oestrogen action in experimental and clinical atherosclerosis.

Arnal JF(1), Douin-Echinard V, Brouchet L, Tremollières F, Laurell H, Lenfant F, 
Gadeau AP, Guery JC, Gourdy P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U589, IFR 31, CHU Toulouse-Rangueil, BP 84225, 31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, 
France. arnal@toulouse.inserm.fr

Whereas hormone replacement/menopause therapy (HRT) in postmenopausal women
increases the coronary artery risk, epidemiological studies (protection in
premenopaused women) suggest and experimental studies (prevention of the
development of fatty streaks in animals) demonstrate a major atheroprotective
action of oestradiol (E2). The understanding of the deleterious and beneficial
effects of oestrogens is thus required. The immuno-inflammatory system plays a
key role in the development of fatty streak deposit as well as in the rupture of 
the atherosclerotic plaque. Whereas E2 favours an anti-inflammatory effect in
vitro (cultured cells), it rather elicits in vivo a proinflammation at the level 
of several subpopulations of the immuno-inflammatory system, which could
contribute to plaque destabilization. Endothelium is another important target for
E2, as it potentiates endothelial NO and prostacyclin production, thus promoting 
the beneficial effects as vasorelaxation and inhibition of platelet aggregation. 
Prostacyclin, but not NO, appears to be involved in the atheroprotective effect
of E2. E2 also accelerates endothelial regrowth, thus favouring vascular healing.
Finally, most of these effects of E2 are mediated by oestrogen receptor alpha,
and are independent of oestrogen receptor beta. In summary, a better
understanding of the mechanisms of oestrogen action not only on the normal and
atheromatous arteries, but also on innate and adaptive immune responses is
required and should help to optimize the prevention of cardiovascular disease
after menopause. These mouse models should help to screen existing and future
selective oestrogen receptor modulators.

PMID: 17109647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Hum Hypertens. 2007 Jan;21(1):20-7. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Angiotensin II and inflammation: the effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibition and angiotensin II receptor blockade.

Dandona P(1), Dhindsa S, Ghanim H, Chaudhuri A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, State University of New
York at Buffalo and Kaleida Health, Buffalo, NY 14209, USA.
pdandona@kaleidahealth.org

Angiotensin II (Ang II) increases adhesion molecules, cytokines and chemokines
and exerts a proinflammatory effect on leucocytes, endothelial cells and vascular
smooth muscle cells. Acting via the type 1 receptor, Ang II initiates an
inflammatory cascade of reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate
oxidase, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nuclear factor-kappaB, which mediates 
transcription and gene expression and increases adhesion molecules and
chemokines. An excess of ROS decreases nitric oxide bioavailability, causes
endothelial dysfunction, and promotes atherosclerosis. Moreover, Ang II
interrupts the anti-inflammatory effects of insulin. Together, these effects
promote a prothrombotic state as well as plaque rupture. Ang II receptor blockers
suppress mediators of inflammation, including ROS and C-reactive protein, and
they increase expression of inhibitory kappaB (an inhibitor of nuclear
factor-kappaB). These anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects, which are
probably due in part to unopposed stimulation of the Ang II type 2 receptor, may 
be beneficial in acute coronary syndromes and may also contribute to the
prevention of type II diabetes mellitus, as insulin resistance is mediated by
inflammatory processes.

PMID: 17096009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Jan;27(1):15-26. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Biomarkers of atherosclerotic plaque instability and rupture.

Koenig W(1), Khuseyinova N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II-Cardiology, University of Ulm Medical
Center, Robert-Koch Str. 8, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.
wolfgang.koenig@uniklinik-ulm.de

Basic research over the last two decades has identified a large number of
molecules pertinent to the atherosclerotic process, which have clearly improved
our understanding of the underlying pathology. It is now well established that
inflammation represents a major feature which is present in the vessel wall
throughout all stages of the disease until the final pathophysiologic steps,
representing plaque destabilization and eventually plaque rupture. Several cells 
typical for the atherosclerotic plaque, like monocyte-derived macrophages and
T-lymphocytes are able to produce and secrete such mediator molecules, like
cytokines, chemokines, growth-factors, enzymes, and disintegrins, which lead to
activation of endothelial cells, proliferation of smooth muscle cells, lesion
progression, and finally to the weakening of a vulnerable plaque by matrix
degradation of its fibrous cap. Today, many of these molecules involved can be
measured systemically by sensitive assays, and elevated concentrations in the
circulation have been shown to be associated with future cardiovascular events.
Determination of several of these molecules carries important prognostic
information, independent of traditional risk factors, and may turn out to be
useful in improving risk stratification. However, for most of these biomarkers
the clinical utility has not yet been established.

PMID: 17082488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Nucl Med. 2006 Nov;47(11):1845-50.

Application of 18F-FDG PET for monitoring the therapeutic effect of
antiinflammatory drugs on stabilization of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques.

Ogawa M(1), Magata Y, Kato T, Hatano K, Ishino S, Mukai T, Shiomi M, Ito K, Saji 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Bio-Photonics Photon Medical Research Center, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.

The rupture of atherosclerotic vulnerable plaques and subsequent formation of
thrombi are the main factors responsible for myocardial and cerebral infarctions.
Because macrophage infiltration plays an essential role in plaque rupturing,
pharmacologic therapy that reduces macrophage infiltration is required to
stabilize the vulnerable plaques. The monitoring of therapeutic effect is
important in assessing the therapeutic effects of drugs for individual patients. 
We previously reported that (18)F-FDG accumulates in macrophage-rich plaques. The
present study was undertaken to investigate the usefulness of (18)F-FDG PET for
monitoring therapies that target vascular inflammation.METHODS: Myocardial
infarction-prone Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits were used in this
study. The antioxidant probucol was included in the diet fed to 4 rabbits
starting at 10 mo of age (probucol group). In a control study, 4 rabbits received
standard rabbit chow (control group). (18)F-FDG PET experiments were performed on
both groups before the study and at 1, 3, and 6 mo after treatment. After the
last imaging session, the rabbits were sacrificed at 3 h after injection of
(18)F-FDG, and the aortas were removed. The accumulated radioactivity was then
measured, and the number of macrophages was determined by examination of stained 
sections.
RESULTS: At the age of 10 mo, before the treatment, the aorta could be imaged by 
(18)F-FDG PET in all rabbits. The aorta could not be imaged after 6 mo of
probucol treatment, whereas intense radioactivity was observed in the control
rabbits throughout the investigation. The standardized uptake values (SUVs) of
the aorta were decreased significantly in the probucol group after 3 mo of
intervention as compared with the pretreatment period. The SUVs of the control
group were increased gradually at 6 mo. Radioactivity in the aorta was
significantly lower in the probucol group than that in the control group.
Macrophages were already present at the beginning of the study, and probucol
treatment for 6 mo resulted in a significant reduction of macrophage
infiltration.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET was able to image the reduction of inflammation by
probucol. (18)F-FDG PET should be useful for evaluating the therapeutic effect of
drugs clinically and for the development of new drugs that can stabilize
vulnerable plaques. (18)F-FDG PET should be useful for evaluating the therapeutic
effect of drugs clinically and for the development of new drugs that can reduce
inflammation of vulnerable plaques.

PMID: 17079818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Can J Anaesth. 2006 Nov;53(11):1126-47.

Review article: The role of statins in reducing perioperative cardiac risk:
Physiologic and clinical perspectives.

Boushra NN(1), Muntazar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Lower Bucks Hospital, 501 Bath Road, Bristol, PA
19007, USA. nadboush@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: To review the pathobiology and clinical implications of coronary
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques (VAPs), to discuss the role of statin therapy 
in VAP stabilization, and the potential benefits of perioperative statin therapy 
(PST) in reducing perioperative risk of acute coronary syndromes (ACSs).
SOURCE: MEDLINE search using "perioperative", "cardiac morbidity",
"atherosclerosis", "vulnerable plaque", "statins" and combinations of these terms
as keywords. The reference lists of relevant articles were further reviewed to
identify additional citations.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The nonstenotic, yet rupture-prone VAP causes most myocardial
infarctions (MIs) and other ACSs, both in the nonsurgical and surgical patients. 
Large clinical trials in both primary and secondary prevention and in patients
with ACSs have demonstrated that statin therapy will reduce cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality across a broad spectrum of patient subgroups. These
trials also suggest, and laboratory investigations establish, that statins
possess favourable vascular effects independent of cholesterol reduction. Statins
appear to interfere specifically with the pathophysiologic mechanisms implicated 
in atherothrombotic disease. Statins reduce vascular inflammation, improve
endothelial function, stabilize VAPs, and reduce platelet aggregability and
thrombus formation. Recent studies have shown that PST is associated with a
reduced incidence of perioperative and long-term cardiovascular complications in 
high-risk patients. Combined therapy with statins and ss-blockers is a
conceptually valid strategy targeting critical steps in the pathogenesis of an
ACS.
CONCLUSION: Emerging evidence for the efficacy and safety of PST is promising,
especially when combined with ss-blocker therapy in patients at highest risk.
Confirmation of this early evidence awaits the results of ongoing and future
prospective randomized controlled trials.

PMID: 17079641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Pharmacol Ther. 2007 Jan;113(1):184-96. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

From pathophysiology to targeted therapy for atherothrombosis: a role for the
combination of statin and aspirin in secondary prevention.

Chapman MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Medical Research (INSERM), Unité 551,
Dyslipoprotéinemies et Athérosclérose: Génétique, Métabolisme et Thérapeutique,
Hôpital de la Pitié, 75651-Paris Cedex 13, France. chapman@chups.jussieu.fr

Atherothrombosis results from direct interaction between the atherosclerotic
plaque and arterial thrombosis, and underlies most forms of cardiovascular
disease (CVD). The pathophysiology of atherosclerosis is now recognised to
involve endothelial dysfunction and dyslipidemia with cholesterol accumulation,
as well as critical immuno-inflammatory and apoptotic dimensions. Erosion or
rupture of a vulnerable, lipid-rich, inflammatory atherosclerotic plaque triggers
the formation of a platelet-rich thrombus that may partially or completely
occlude the artery, with resultant clinical scenarios including stable and
unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction (MI) and ischaemic stroke. Insight
into the pathophysiology of atherothrombosis indicates that an integrated risk
factor approach, focusing particularly on management of dyslipidaemia (with a
statin) and thrombosis (with aspirin), may constitute an optimal therapeutic
approach. Both agents have established roles in secondary prevention. Statin
action on atherogenic lipoproteins mediates plaque stabilisation, modification of
plaque morphology and attenuation of inflammation, and may lead to plaque
regression, while aspirin reduces platelet activation and aggregation, decreases 
release of inflammatory cytokines at sites of vascular injury and attenuates
vasoconstriction. Given these complementary modes of action, this combination
would be a logical choice for reducing atherothrombotic risk in patients with
CVD. Meta-analysis of 5 major clinical studies has demonstrated that the
combination of pravastatin plus aspirin was significantly more effective than
either agent alone in reducing the relative risk of key cardiovascular endpoints 
including MI and ischaemic stroke. This combination may therefore represent an
important, cost-efficient therapeutic approach to reduction of cardiovascular
risk and prevention of recurrent events in stable CVD.

PMID: 17070923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Jan;27(1):134-40. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Haptoglobin genotype is a determinant of iron, lipid peroxidation, and macrophage
accumulation in the atherosclerotic plaque.

Levy AP(1), Levy JE, Kalet-Litman S, Miller-Lotan R, Levy NS, Asaf R, Guetta J,
Yang C, Purushothaman KR, Fuster V, Moreno PR.

Author information: 
(1)Technion Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel. alevy@tx.technion.ac.il

OBJECTIVE: Intraplaque hemorrhage increases the risk of plaque rupture and
thrombosis. The release of hemoglobin (Hb) from extravasated erythrocytes at the 
site of hemorrhage leads to iron deposition, which may increase oxidation and
inflammation in the atherosclerotic plaque. The haptoglobin (Hp) protein is
critical for protection against Hb-induced injury. Two common alleles exist at
the Hp locus and the Hp 2 allele has been associated with increased risk of
myocardial infarction. We have demonstrated decreased anti-oxidative and
anti-inflammatory activity for the Hp 2 protein. We tested the hypothesis that
the Hp 2-2 genotype is associated with increased oxidative and macrophage
accumulation in atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The murine Hp gene is a type 1 Hp allele. We created a
murine type 2 Hp allele and targeted its insertion to the Hp locus by homologous 
recombination. Atherosclerotic plaques from C57Bl/6 ApoE-/- Hp 2-2 mice were
associated with increased iron (P=0.008), lipid peroxidation (4-hydroxynonenal
and ceroid) and macrophage accumulation (P=0.03) as compared with plaques from
C57Bl/6 ApoE-/- Hp 1-1 mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased iron, lipid peroxidation and macrophage accumulation in
ApoE-/- Hp 2-2 plaques suggests that the Hp genotype plays a critical role in the
oxidative and inflammatory response to intraplaque hemorrhage.

PMID: 17068284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Hypertens. 2006 Nov;24(11):2121-30.

Vascular failure: A new clinical entity for vascular disease.

Inoue T(1), Node K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Renal Medicine, Saga University Faculty of
Medicine, Saga, Japan. inouete@med.saga-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2006 Nov;24(11):2147-8.

Atherosclerosis is characterized by the response of the vessel wall to chronic
multifactorial injury leading to the formation of atheromatous or fibrous
plaques. Endothelial dysfunction represents an initial stage of atherosclerosis. 
In addition to endothelial dysfunction, smooth muscle dysfunction, metabolic
abnormalities of the vessel wall including inflammation, oxidative stress and
alterations of neurohormonal balance occur in various stages of atherosclerosis. 
We now propose a new clinical entity 'vascular failure', defined as the
integration of all of these vascular abnormalities. Vascular failure is not an
anatomical disease, but rather a comprehensive syndrome of abnormal vascular
function. Vascular failure extends from risk factors to established
atherosclerotic disease with arterial stenosis, and further to calcification of
the vessel wall or serious vascular events that may be caused by plaque rupture
and thromboembolic occlusion. We propose aggressive intervention to modify
various risk factors, applying to this integrated new entity, vascular failure.

PMID: 17053528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cell Cycle. 2006 Oct;5(20):2329-31. Epub 2006 Oct 16.

Defining the role of vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis in atherosclerosis.

Clarke M(1), Bennett M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Box 110,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) apoptosis occurs in many arterial diseases,
including aneurysm formation, angioplasty restenosis and atherosclerosis.
Although VSMC apoptosis promotes vessel remodelling, coagulation and
inflammation, its precise contribution to these diseases is unknown, given that
apoptosis frequently accompanies vessel injury or alterations to flow. Using
transgenic mice with selective induction of VSMC apoptosis, a recent study has
precisely determined the direct consequences of VSMC apoptosis in both normal
vessels and atherosclerotic plaques. Surprisingly, normal arteries can withstand 
huge cell losses with little change in active or passive properties. Normal
vessels demonstrate highly efficient clearance of apoptotic bodies, even in the
absence of professional phagocytes. In contrast, VSMC apoptosis alone is
sufficient to induce multiple features of vulnerability to rupture in plaques,
identifying VSMC apoptosis as a critical process determining plaque stability.

PMID: 17012894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Dec;26(12):2594-604. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Procoagulant microparticles: disrupting the vascular homeostasis equation?

Morel O(1), Toti F, Hugel B, Bakouboula B, Camoin-Jau L, Dignat-George F,
Freyssinet JM.

Author information: 
(1)Université Louis Pasteur, Faculté de Médecine, Institut d'Hématologie et
d'Immunologie, Strasbourg, France.

Apoptosis and vascular cell activation are main contributors to the release of
procoagulant microparticles (MPs), deleterious partners in atherothrombosis.
Elevated levels of circulating platelet, monocyte, or endothelial-derived MPs are
associated with most of the cardiovascular risk factors and appear indicative of 
poor clinical outcome. In addition to being a valuable hallmark of vascular cell 
damage, MPs are at the crossroad of atherothrombosis processes by exerting direct
effects on vascular or blood cells. Under pathological circumstances, circulating
MPs would support cellular cross-talk leading to vascular inflammation and tissue
remodeling, endothelial dysfunction, leukocyte adhesion, and stimulation. Exposed
membrane phosphatidylserine and functional tissue factor (TF) are 2 procoagulant 
entities conveyed by circulating MPs. At sites of vascular injury, P-selectin
exposure by activated endothelial cells or platelets leads to the rapid
recruitment of MPs bearing the P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 and blood-borne
TF, thereby triggering coagulation. Within the atherosclerotic plaque,
sequestered MPs constitute the main reservoir of TF activity, promoting
coagulation after plaque erosion or rupture. Lesion-bound MPs, eventually
harboring proteolytic and angiogenic effectors are additional actors in plaque
vulnerability. Pharmacological strategies aimed at modulating the release of
procoagulant MPs appear a promising therapeutic approach of both thrombotic
processes and bleeding disorders.

PMID: 16990554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Nov;26(11):2523-9. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 protein expression in the natural
progression of human coronary atherosclerosis.

Kolodgie FD(1), Burke AP, Skorija KS, Ladich E, Kutys R, Makuria AT, Virmani R.

Author information: 
(1)CVPath Institute Inc, 19 Firstfield Road, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Nov;26(11):2417-8.

OBJECTIVE: Although lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) has
received recent attention as a biomarker of inflammation and risk for acute
coronary events, its relative expression in coronary plaque phenotypes, including
unstable lesions, has not been established.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coronary segments (n=30) were prospectively collected from
25 sudden coronary death patients for immunolocalization of Lp-PLA2. Lesion
morphologies were classified as pathologic intimal thickening, fibroatheromas,
thin-cap fibroatheromas (fibrous cap thicknesses <65 microm), and rupture. The
expression of Lp-PLA2 was detected using a specific monoclonal antibody.
Apoptosis was identified by DNA end-labeling using terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase (TdT). Lp-PLA2 staining in early plaques was absent or minimally
detected. In contrast, thin-cap fibroatheromas and ruptured plaques showed
intense Lp-PLA2 expression within necrotic cores and surrounding macrophages
including those in the fibrous cap. The degree of macrophage apoptosis was
greater in thin-cap fibroatheroma and ruptures compared with less advanced
plaques with additional double labeling studies showing Lp-PLA2 present in
apoptotic cells in regions of high macrophage density.
CONCLUSIONS: Lp-PLA2 is strongly expressed within the necrotic core and
surrounding macrophages of vulnerable and ruptured plaques, with relatively weak 
staining in less advanced lesions. These findings together with the association
of Lp-PLA2 in apoptotic macrophages suggest a potential role in promoting plaque 
instability.

PMID: 16960105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):C251-8. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Calcium-independent phospholipase A2-catalyzed plasmalogen hydrolysis in hypoxic 
human coronary artery endothelial cells.

Meyer MC(1), McHowat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 1402 S.
Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Thrombin stimulation of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAEC) results
in activation of a membrane-associated, calcium-independent phospholipase A(2)
(iPLA(2)) that selectively hydrolyzes membrane plasmalogen phospholipids. Rupture
of an atherosclerotic plaque and occlusion of the coronary vasculature results in
a coronary ischemic event in which HCAEC in the ischemic area would be exposed to
dramatic decreases in oxygen tension in addition to thrombin exposure. We exposed
HCAEC to hypoxia in the presence or absence of thrombin stimulation and measured 
iPLA(2) activation, membrane phospholipid hydrolysis, and the accumulation of
biologically active phospholipid metabolites. HCAEC exposed to hypoxia, thrombin 
stimulation, or a combination of the two conditions demonstrated an increase in
iPLA(2) activity and an increase in arachidonic acid release from
plasmenylcholine. Thrombin stimulation of normoxic HCAEC did not result in an
accumulation of choline lysophospholipids, but hypoxia alone and in combination
with thrombin stimulation led to a significant accumulation of
lysoplasmenylcholine (LPlsCho). We propose that the presence of hypoxia inhibits 
LPlsCho catabolism, at least in part, as a result of the accumulation of
long-chain acylcarnitines. The combination of increased production and decreased 
catabolism of LPlsCho is necessary for its accumulation. Pretreatment with
bromoenol lactone to inhibit iPLA(2) blocked membrane phospholipid hydrolysis and
production of membrane phospholipid-derived metabolites. The increase in iPLA(2) 
activity and the subsequent accumulation of membrane phospholipid-derived
metabolites in HCAEC exposed to hypoxia or thrombin stimulation alone, and
particularly in combination, have important implications in inflammation and
arrhythmogenesis in atherosclerosis/thrombosis and subsequent myocardial
ischemia.

PMID: 16943248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Hypertens Suppl. 2006 Aug;24(5):S18-20.

Arteries, inflammation and insulin resistance.

Amar J(1), Perez L, Burcelin R, Chamontin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of internal medicine and arterial hypertension, Hôpital Rangueil,
Toulouse, France. amar.j@chu-toulouse.fr

Inflammation plays a role in all stages of atherosclerosis from the formation to 
the rupture of the plaque. Guided by inflammatory mediators, monocytes bind to an
endothelium damaged by cardiovascular risk factors, and then migrate towards the 
intima where, after incorporating oxidized low-density lipoprotein particles,
they are transformed into foam cells. The lipid streak forms and develops as an
atherosclerotic plaque, which is susceptible to erosion and rupture. Inflammation
fed by excess adipose tissue decreases insulin sensitivity, which is the central 
feature of the metabolic syndrome. Inflammation therefore appears to be a common 
factor of atherosclerosis and the metabolic syndrome. The factors triggering this
inflammation have yet to be determined. One line of thought would appear to point
to diet.

PMID: 16936531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Aug;6(5):501-14.

Metabolic syndrome and diabetic atherothrombosis: implications in vascular
complications.

Meerarani P(1), Badimon JJ, Zias E, Fuster V, Moreno PR.

Author information: 
(1)The Zena and Michael Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Metabolic syndrome is characterized by the clustering of a number of metabolic
abnormalities in the presence of underlying insulin resistance with a strong
association with diabetes and cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality. The
disorder is defined in different ways, but the pathophysiology is attributable to
insulin resistance. An increased release of free fatty acids (FFAs) from
adipocytes block insulin signal transduction pathway, induce endothelial
dysfunction due to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and
oxidative stress. Dyslipidemia, associated with high levels of triglycerides and 
low concentrations of high density lipoproteins (HDLs), contributes to a
proinflammatory state. Inflammation, the key pathogenic component of
atherosclerosis, promotes thrombosis, a process that underlies acute coronary
event and stroke. Tissue factor, a potent trigger of the coagulation cascade, is 
increased in diabetes with poor glycemic control. Therapeutic lifestyle changes
(weight loss and physical activity) along with pharmacological interventions are 
recommended to prevent the complications of metabolic syndrome. In addition to
statins, metformin, blood pressure lowering medications, interventions to
increase HDLs are other important approaches to decrease the risk of
cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, the peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor (PPAR)-alpha and gamma agonists are potent anti-inflammatory and
anti-atherogenic agents that could both improve insulin sensitivity and the
long-term cardiovascular risk. In this review we focus on the molecular and
pathophysiological basis of metabolic syndrome, which augments diabetes (insulin 
resistance) and the contribution of neovascularization in the plaque progression 
in diabetes, leading to rupture and coronary thrombosis.

PMID: 16918371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Aug;6(5):479-88.

Intraplaque hemorrhage.

Levy AP(1), Moreno PR.

Author information: 
(1)Bruce Rappaport Technion Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. alevy@tx.technion.ac.il

Intraplaque hemorrhage is a common feature of atherosclerotic plaques and is
considered one of the identifying features of complex lesions preceding acute
ischemic events. The cause of intraplaque hemorrhage is most often secondary to
rupture of neovessels, which have invaded the plaque. However, inflammation and
metabolic factors such as diabetes may also precipitate hemorrhage from mature
microvessels by damaging the endothelium. The mechanism by which hemorrhage
destabilizes the plaque is in large part secondary to the action of hemoglobin
released from red blood cells at the site of the hemorrhage. Hemoglobin is a
potent pro-inflammatory agent by virtue of its ability to promote formation of
ROS. The major defense mechanism against the toxic effects of extracorpuscular
hemoglobin is the protein haptoglobin, which tightly binds to hemoglobin and
prevents it from catalyzing oxidative reactions. There exists a common allelic
polymorphism in the haptoglobin gene, which has recently been strongly associated
with the risk of cardiovascular disease in multiple independent cohorts. The
protein products of the two different haptoglobin alleles differ in their ability
to serve as an antioxidant against hemoglobin and also to activate the CD163
receptor. This review presents a unifying hypothesis whereby the haptoglobin
genotype is proposed to modulate the response to intraplaque hemorrhage and
thereby play a fundamental role in determining the morphological and metabolic
features of complex plaques preceding acute ischemic events.

PMID: 16918369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Aug;6(5):457-77.

Neovascularization in human atherosclerosis.

Moreno PR(1), Purushothaman KR, Zias E, Sanz J, Fuster V.

Author information: 
(1)The Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, and The Marie-Josee
and Henry R. Kravis Cardiovascular Health Center, The Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA. pedro.moreno@msnyuhealth.org

In the absence of disease, microvessels provide vessel wall nutrients to the
tunica media, while the intima is fed by oxygen diffusion from the lumen. As
disease evolves and the tunica intima thickens, oxygen diffusion is impaired, and
microvessels become the major source for nutrients to the vessel wall.
Microvessels serve as a port of entry for inflammatory cells, from the systemic
circulation to the nascent atherosclerotic lesion. As disease progress,
microvessels also play a role in intraplaque hemorrhage, lipid core expansion,
and plaque rupture. In addition, microvessels are also involved in stent
restenosis, and plaque regression. Therefore, microvessels are a pivotal
component of atherosclerosis, and proper patient risk-stratification in the near 
future may include the detection of increased neovascularization in
atherosclerotic lesions. This review divided in two parts summarizes the current 
understanding of atherosclerosis neovascularization, starting with the normal
anatomy and physiology and progressing to more advanced stages of the disease. We
will review the structure and function of vasa vasorum in health and disease, the
mechanisms responsible for the angiogenic process, the role of the immune system,
including inflammation and Toll-like receptors, and the pathology of microvessels
in early atherosclerotic plaques. Furthermore, the review addresses the advanced 
stages of atherosclerosis, summarizing the progressive role for microvessels
during disease progression, red blood cell extravasation, lipid core expansion,
plaque rupture, healing, repair, restenosis, and disease regression, offering the
clinician a state-of-the-art, "bench to bedside" approach to neovascularization
in human atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16918368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Autophagy. 2006 Oct-Dec;2(4):312-4. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

z-VAD-fmk-induced non-apoptotic cell death of macrophages: possibilities and
limitations for atherosclerotic plaque stabilization.

Martinet W(1), Schrijvers DM, Herman AG, De Meyer GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
wim.martinet@ua.ac.be

Macrophages play a pivotal role in atherosclerotic plaque destabilization in
contrast to smooth muscle cells (SMCs). As a consequence, removal of macrophages 
from plaques via selective induction of cell death represents a promising
approach to stabilize non-obstructive, rupture-prone atherosclerotic lesions.
However, the mechanisms to initiate cell death in macrophages but not in other
cell types of the plaque, in particular SMCs, are unknown. Recently, we have
shown that the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk induces autophagy and necrotic
cell death in J774A.1 and RAW264.7 macrophages as well as in IFN-gamma primed
primary mouse peritoneal macrophages, but not in vascular SMCs or C2C12
myoblasts. The different sensitivity to z-VAD-fmk is largely based on
differential expression of receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1). This finding
suggests that caspase inhibition activates RIP1 which in turn initiates
autophagy, although other explanations should be taken into account.
z-VAD-fmk-treated J774A.1 macrophages overexpress and secrete several chemokines 
and cytokines, including TNFalpha. The combination of z-VAD-fmk and TNFalpha, but
not TNFalpha alone, induces SMC necrosis. In this regard, z-VAD-fmk is
detrimental and not beneficial for atherosclerotic plaque stability due to
stimulation of inflammatory responses and indirect induction of SMC death. Future
work is needed to determine the mechanism(s) that selectively trigger
non-apoptotic cell death in plaque macrophages without evoking inflammation and
SMC death.

PMID: 16874073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin Ter. 2006 Mar-Apr;157(2):135-42.

[Morphological aspects of atherosclerosis lesion: past and present].

[Article in Italian]

Gaudio E(1), Carpino G, Grassi M, Musca A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Anatomia Umana, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università
degli Studi "La Sapienza ", Roma, Italia. eugenio.gaudio@uniroma1.it

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory process disease that involves the artery wall 
and that is characterized by the progressive accumulation of lipids. The term
arteriosclerosis has been created by Lobstein in 1833. Subsequently, during the
19th century, the contribution of Rokitansky and Virchow was important to
elucidate the pathogenesis of arteriosclerosis and the morphologic aspects of the
plaque. In the beginning of the 20th century, Aschoff was a leading proponent who
regarded the morphologically different intimal lipid deposits of children and
adults as early and late stages of one disease and he called them atherosis and
atherosclerosis, respectively. The first classification of atherosclerosis was
made by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1958 and it consisted of the
following sequence: fatty streak, atheroma, fibrous plaque and complicated
lesions. In 1990s, thanks to much more sensitive techniques, the American Heart
Association (AHA) proposed a new morphological classification based on eight
lesion types designated by Roman numerals which indicate the usual sequence of
lesion progression. Finally, Virmani et al. (2000) described a classification
with the add of a specific plaque type, not recognized by the AHA classification,
called "thin fibrous cap atheroma" which is more likely to rupture. The
atherosclerotic process is characterized by typical ultrastructural changes that 
mainly involve the endothelial and smooth muscle cells. The morphological
alterations of the endothelium are associated with dysfunctions leading to a
proinflammatory and prothrombotic phenotype. This process seems to be due to
turbulent blood flow and low fluid shear stress that normally occurs in
particular regions of the vascular tree. Inflammation has a key role in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and it is supported by numerous factors such as
modified LDL, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, free radicals and, in particular, 
by infectious agents such as Chlamydia pneumoniae.

PMID: 16817503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Przegl Lek. 2005;62(12):1506-9.

[Atherosclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis].

[Article in Polish]

Löwenhoff T(1), Głuszko P.

Author information: 
(1)Zakład Reumatologii i Balneologii, Collegium Medicum, Uniwersytetu
Jagiellońskiego, Kraków. zruj@mp.pl

There is growing evidence that patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are at
higher risk of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) including myocardial infarction and 
stroke. Recent analysis indicate that CVD is the most common cause of death in
RA; however research on traditional risk factors such as smoking, hypertension or
elevated cholesterol level has shown mixed results. There are many convincing
suggestions that RA-specific factors associated with systemic inflammation may
play a critical role in endothelial cell damage and accelerated development of
atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is currently recognized as a chronic
inflammatory condition that can be converted into an acute clinical event by
plaque rupture and thrombosis--the interplay between inflammatory mediators
including cytokines (TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6), C-reactive protein, blood
coagulation factors and vessel wall cells attracts much attention. Their pivotal 
role in the pathogenesis of both diseases, RA and atherosclerosis has been
presented and discussed in our review.

PMID: 16786783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Pathophysiology. 2006 Aug;13(3):129-42. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Oxidative stress and atherosclerosis.

Singh U(1), Jialal I.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory for Atherosclerosis and Metabolic Research, UC Davis Medical
Center, Sacramento, CA, United States.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in
the Western world. Its incidence has been increasing lately in developing
countries. Several lines of evidence support a role for oxidative stress in
atherogenesis. Growing evidence indicates that chronic and acute overproduction
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under pathophysiologic conditions is integral in
the development of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). ROS mediate various signaling
pathways that underlie vascular inflammation in atherogenesis from the initiation
of fatty streak development through lesion progression to ultimate plaque
rupture. Various animal models of oxidative stress support the notion that ROS
have a causal role in atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular diseases. Human
investigations also support the oxidative stress hypothesis of atherosclerosis.
Oxidative stress is the unifying mechanism for many CVD risk factors, which
additionally supports its central role in CVD. A main source of ROS in vascular
cells is the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide/nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NAD(P)H) oxidase system. This is a membrane-associated
enzyme, composed of five subunits, catalyzing the one-electron reduction of
oxygen, using NADH or NADPH as the electron donor. This system is an important
target for genetic investigations. Identification of groups of patients with
genetically prone or resistant of oxidative stress is therefore an obvious target
of investigation. A better understanding of the complexity of cellular redox
reactions, development of a new class of antioxidants targeted to specific
subcellular sites, and the phenotype-genotype linkage analysis for oxidative
stress will likely be avenues for future research with regards to the broader use
of pharmacological therapies in the treatment and prevention of CVD.

PMID: 16757157  [PubMed]


441. Coron Artery Dis. 2006 May;17(3):243-8.

Decreased number of circulating plasmacytoid dendritic cells in patients with
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.

Van Vré EA(1), Hoymans VY, Bult H, Lenjou M, Van Bockstaele DR, Vrints CJ,
Bosmans JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
emily.vanvre@ua.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting and immune modulating
cells that have been implicated in the development of atherosclerosis. In human
blood, two distinct lineages are distinguished: plasmacytoid dendritic cells and 
myeloid dendritic cells. Although dendritic cells have been described in
atherosclerotic plaques, no information exists concerning circulating blood
dendritic cells in atherosclerosis. This study aims to evaluate the number of
circulating dendritic cells in patients with coronary artery disease. The
relation with the extent of coronary artery disease, the clinical syndrome and
with a marker of inflammation will be documented.
METHODS: Patients with angiographically proven coronary artery disease (n=18) and
age and sex-matched controls (n=18) were included. Myeloid dendritic cells and
plasmacytoid dendritic cells were detected with the specific blood dendritic cell
antigens, blood dendritic cell antigen-1 and blood dendritic cell antigen-2,
respectively.
RESULTS: Absolute and relative numbers of circulating plasmacytoid dendritic
cells were significantly lower in patients with coronary artery disease
(5722+/-601/ml and 0.08+/-0.01%) than in controls (12,640+/-1289/ml and
0.21+/-0.02%). Plasmacytoid dendritic cells were more decreased in patients with 
troponin-positive unstable coronary syndromes than in patients with low troponin 
values, and tended to be lower in more extensive coronary artery disease.
Absolute myeloid dendritic cells numbers tended to be reduced in patients,
whereas relative numbers were significantly decreased: 11,857+/-1895/ml versus
15,226+/-928/ml and 0.17+/-0.03% versus 0.26+/-0.01% in controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows a significant decrease of circulating blood 
dendritic cell antigen-2 positive plasmacytoid dendritic cells in patients with
coronary artery disease. The decrease tended to be more pronounced in unstable
coronary syndromes and extensive coronary artery disease, suggesting a possible
role of dendritic cells in plaque progression and rupture.

PMID: 16728874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. BMC Nucl Med. 2006 May 25;6:3.

Non-invasive imaging of atherosclerotic plaque macrophage in a rabbit model with 
F-18 FDG PET: a histopathological correlation.

Zhang Z(1), Machac J, Helft G, Worthley SG, Tang C, Zaman AG, Rodriguez OJ,
Buchsbaum MS, Fuster V, Badimon JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, The Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. zhuangyu.zhang@mssm.edu

BACKGROUND: Coronary atherosclerosis and its thrombotic complications are the
major cause of mortality and morbidity throughout the industrialized world.
Thrombosis on disrupted atherosclerotic plaques plays a key role in the onset of 
acute coronary syndromes. Macrophages density is one of the most critical
compositions of plaque in both plaque vulnerability and thrombogenicity upon
rupture. It has been shown that macrophages have a high uptake of 18F-FDG (FDG). 
We studied the correlation of FDG uptake with histopathological macrophage
accumulation in atherosclerotic plaques in a rabbit model.
METHODS: Atherosclerosis was induced in rabbits (n = 6) by a combination of
atherogenic diet and balloon denudation of the aorta. PET imaging was performed
at baseline and 2 months after atherogenic diet and coregistered with magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging. Normal (n = 3) rabbits served as controls. FDG uptake by 
the thoracic aorta was expressed as concentration (muCi/ml) and the ratio of
aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity. FDG uptake and RAM-11 antibody positive
areas were analyzed in descending aorta.
RESULTS: Atherosclerotic aortas showed significantly higher uptake of FDG than
normal aortas. The correlation of aortic FDG uptake with macrophage areas
assessed by histopathology was statistically significant although it was not high
(r = 0.48, p < 0.0001). When uptake was expressed as the ratio of aortic
uptake-to-blood activity, it correlated better (r = 0.80, p < 0.0001) with the
macrophage areas, due to the correction for residual blood FDG activity.
CONCLUSION: PET FDG activity correlated with macrophage content within aortic
atherosclerosis. This imaging approach might serve as a useful non-invasive
imaging technique and potentially permit monitoring of relative changes in
inflammation within the atherosclerotic lesion.

PMCID: PMC1479805
PMID: 16725052  [PubMed]


443. Neurologist. 2006 May;12(3):140-8.

Inflammation, atherosclerosis, and stroke.

Elkind MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
mse13@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Inflammation has received increasing attention in recent years as a
cause of atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, and stroke. Basic and animal
research has implicated inflammatory mechanisms in the pathogenesis and
progression of atherosclerosis, as well as in clinical events related to plaque
rupture and other atherothrombotic events.
REVIEW SUMMARY: The literature on the association of inflammatory markers with
risk of stroke was reviewed and a clinical example provided. Several inflammatory
biomarkers, and particularly high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), have
been identified as likely predictors of the risk of a future stroke. Medications,
particularly hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors, or statins,
have been demonstrated to reduce levels of inflammatory markers independently of 
effects on cholesterol. Most recently, the ability of these agents to reduce risk
of myocardial infarction and other coronary events in patients with acute
coronary artery disease has been demonstrated to correlate with their ability to 
lower levels of hsCRP. Whether reduction of hsCRP would have similar benefits in 
stroke patients remains unsettled, as does whether other drugs may be similarly
used to lower hsCRP levels.
CONCLUSION: Inflammatory biomarkers, especially hsCRP, may allow improved
prediction of the risk of stroke in primary and secondary stroke prevention.
Modalities to reduce inflammation are becoming available that may help to modify 
this risk. Further studies, however, are needed before inflammatory markers
become a routine part of the evaluation of stroke patients.

PMID: 16688015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Hamostaseologie. 2006 May;26(2):114-8.

[The role of platelets for the pathophysiology of acute coronary syndromes].

[Article in German]

Langer H(1), Gawaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik III, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str.10,
72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Cardiovascular diseases, especially ischaemic heart disease, are actually the
most frequent causes of death in the Western world and represent a central
challenge for modern research and medicine. The pathophysiology of ischaemic
heart disease is based upon the development and biological remodelling of
atherosclerotic plaques. Mainly at late stages, but also in the early phase of
atherosclerosis, rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque occurs and may lead to the
clinical manifestation of acute coronary syndromes, including unstable angina
pectoris, non-transmural or transmural myocardial infarction. Next to
inflammation mediating cells like monocytes, platelets play an essential role at 
early and late stages of atherosclerotic disorders. This review summarizes the
basic pathophysiological mechanism of platelet adhesion and secretion, the
molecular steps involved in platelet mediated thrombus formation in the
atherosclerotic microenvironment and the role of platelet accumulation in
reperfused myocardium.

PMID: 16676053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Apr 18;47(8 Suppl):C7-12.

Pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

Falk E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital (Skejby), Aarhus,
Denmark. erling.falk@ki.au.dk

Atherosclerosis is a multifocal, smoldering, immunoinflammatory disease of
medium-sized and large arteries fuelled by lipids. Endothelial cells, leukocytes,
and intimal smooth muscle cells are the major players in the development of this 
disease. The most devastating consequences of atherosclerosis, such as heart
attack and stroke, are caused by superimposed thrombosis. Therefore, the vital
question is not why atherosclerosis develops but rather why atherosclerosis,
after years of indolent growth, suddenly becomes complicated with luminal
thrombosis. If thrombosis-prone plaques could be detected and thrombosis averted,
atherosclerosis would be a much more benign disease. Approximately 76% of all
fatal coronary thrombi are precipitated by plaque rupture. Plaque rupture is a
more frequent cause of coronary thrombosis in men (approximately 80%) than in
women (approximately 60%). Ruptured plaques are characterized by a large
lipid-rich core, a thin fibrous cap that contains few smooth muscle cells and
many macrophages, angiogenesis, adventitial inflammation, and outward remodeling.
Plaque rupture is the most common cause of coronary thrombosis. Ruptured plaques 
and, by inference, rupture-prone plaques have characteristic pathoanatomical
features that might be useful for their detection in vivo by imaging. This
article describes the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, how it begets thrombosis, 
and the possibility to detect thrombosis-prone plaques and prevent heart attack.

PMID: 16631513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Perspect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther. 2006 Mar;18(1):63-70.

Carotid plaque morphologic characteristics.

Aidinian G(1), Weiswasser JM, Arora S, Abularrage CJ, Singh N, Sidawy AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Carotid artery atherosclerosis is predominantly believed to mirror
atherosclerosis elsewhere in the body. Endothelial injury results in expression
of cell surface adhesion molecules with expression of sequence of genes involved 
in the inflammatory pathway and expression of proinflammatory cytokines. The
combination of the inflammatory mediators and contribution by monocytes
infiltrating the intima and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation result in
the development of atheromatous plaque with a lipid-rich necrotic core.
Complications of these atheromatous plaques can lead to plaque instability,
rupture, and subsequent hemorrhage or ulceration. The significant risk factors,
characteristics associated with symptoms, and available diagnostic imaging
modalities are also discussed with review of the relevant literature.

PMID: 16628337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Apr;64(4):734-41.

[Use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
blockers in patients with acute coronary syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Iino K(1), Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)The Internal Medicine Cardiology and Respiratory, Akita University School of
Medicine.

Renin-angiotensin system is well known that it plays an important role in the
initiation and amplification of atherosclerosis that lead to cardiovascular
disease. Angiotensin II is deeply involved in vasoconstriction, oxidative stress,
inflammation, thrombosis, vascular remodeling, and sympathetic nerve activity.
Many studies have documented the favorable effects of angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitor(ACE-I) and angiotensin receptor blocker(ARB) on cardiovascular
disease in basic and clinical trials. Now accumulated evidences suggest ACE-I and
ARB potentially prevent coronary plaque rapture, thrombosis and myocardial
remodeling with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). ACS is occurred from plaque
rupture on mild to moderate coronary atherosclerosis. Therefore, on treatment of 
ACS, it is important to prevent the plaque rupture and thrombosis by
pharmacological intervention with ACE-I and ARB than coronary artery intervention
which is down stream therapy for coronary artery stenosis.

PMID: 16613192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Physiol Rev. 2006 Apr;86(2):515-81.

Cytokines in atherosclerosis: pathogenic and regulatory pathways.

Tedgui A(1), Mallat Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U. 689,
Cardiovascular Research Center Lariboisiere, and University Paris 7, Paris,
France. tedgui@larib.inserm.fr

Atherosclerosis is a chronic disease of the arterial wall where both innate and
adaptive immunoinflammatory mechanisms are involved. Inflammation is central at
all stages of atherosclerosis. It is implicated in the formation of early fatty
streaks, when the endothelium is activated and expresses chemokines and adhesion 
molecules leading to monocyte/lymphocyte recruitment and infiltration into the
subendothelium. It also acts at the onset of adverse clinical vascular events,
when activated cells within the plaque secrete matrix proteases that degrade
extracellular matrix proteins and weaken the fibrous cap, leading to rupture and 
thrombus formation. Cells involved in the atherosclerotic process secrete and are
activated by soluble factors, known as cytokines. Important recent advances in
the comprehension of the mechanisms of atherosclerosis provided evidence that the
immunoinflammatory response in atherosclerosis is modulated by regulatory
pathways, in which the two anti-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-10 and
transforming growth factor-beta play a critical role. The purpose of this review 
is to bring together the current information concerning the role of cytokines in 
the development, progression, and complications of atherosclerosis. Specific
emphasis is placed on the contribution of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines to
pathogenic (innate and adaptive) and regulatory immunity in the context of
atherosclerosis. Based on our current knowledge of the role of cytokines in
atherosclerosis, we propose some novel therapeutic strategies to combat this
disease. In addition, we discuss the potential of circulating cytokine levels as 
biomarkers of coronary artery disease.

PMID: 16601268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006 Jan-Feb;13(1):111-8.

Atherosclerosis imaging on the molecular level.

Bengel FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nuklearmedizinische Klinik und Poliklinik der Technischen Universität München,
München, Germany. fbengel1@jhmi.edu

On the basis of clinical observations that acute coronary events often result
from rupture of atherosclerotic plaques at sites with no or minor luminal
narrowing, the search for techniques by which to identify vulnerable,
rupture-prone lesions has developed into a quest for the holy grail of
cardiovascular medicine. Vulnerable plaques may show characteristic morphologic
features, but they may still differ in their biology and their activity, which
ultimately leads to rupture. As a consequence, considerable efforts have been
undertaken to identify biologic mechanisms of atherosclerotic lesions by use of
molecular-targeted radiolabeled probes. A variety of approaches aiming at plaque 
inflammation, apoptosis, smooth muscle cell proliferation, extracellular matrix
activation, or platelet binding have been introduced. Nevertheless, molecular
imaging of atherosclerosis is still a work in progress. Challenges related to the
best targeting approach, to translation of animal model results to the clinical
setting, to adequate imaging methodology for visualization of coronary artery
biology, and to a suitable target patient population will need to be overcome.
But the field is steadily moving ahead and getting closer to the ultimate goal of
an improved clinical risk assessment through in vivo assessment of vascular
biology.

PMID: 16464725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Membr Biol. 2005 Jul;206(2):103-16.

Omega-3 fatty acids and the regulation of expression of endothelial
pro-atherogenic and pro-inflammatory genes.

De Caterina R(1), Massaro M.

Author information: 
(1)G. d'Annunzio University, Chieti, Italy. rdecater@unich.it

By partially replacing the corresponding omega-6 analogues in membrane
phospholipids, omega-3 fatty acids have been shown to decrease the
transcriptional activation of genes--e.g., adhesion molecules, chemoattractants, 
inflammatory cytokines--involved in endothelial activation in response to
inflammatory and pro-atherogenic stimuli. This regulation occurs, at least in
part, through a decreased activation of the nuclear factor-kappaB system of
transcription factors, secondary to decreased generation of intracellular
hydrogen peroxide. Such regulation by omega-3 fatty acids is likely linked to the
presence of a higher number of double bonds in the fatty acid chain in omega-3
compared with omega-6 fatty acids. By similar mechanisms, omega-3 fatty acids
have been recently shown to reduce gene expression of cyclooxygenase-2, an
inflammatory gene involved, through the activation of some metalloproteinases, in
plaque angiogenesis and plaque rupture. The quenching of gene expression of
pro-inflammatory pro-atherogenic genes by omega-3 fatty acids has consequences on
the extent of leukocyte adhesion to vascular endothelium, early atherogenesis and
later stages of plaque development and plaque rupture, ultimately yielding a
plausible comprehensive explanation for the vasculoprotective effects of these
nutrients.

PMID: 16456721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Apr;26(4):857-63. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Enhanced T-cell expression of RANK ligand in acute coronary syndrome: possible
role in plaque destabilization.

Sandberg WJ(1), Yndestad A, Øie E, Smith C, Ueland T, Ovchinnikova O, Robertson
AK, Müller F, Semb AG, Scholz H, Andreassen AK, Gullestad L, Damås JK, Frøland
SS, Hansson GK, Halvorsen B, Aukrust P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, 
N-0027 Oslo, Norway. wiggo.sandberg@klinmed.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Based on its role in inflammation and matrix degradation, we
hypothesized a role for osteoprotegerin (OPG), RANK, and RANK ligand (RANKL) in
coronary artery disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined the expression of various members of the
OPG/RANKL/RANK axis in patients with stable and unstable angina and in the
atherosclerotic lesions of apolipoprotein E-deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice. Our
findings were: (1) Serum levels of OPG were raised in patients with unstable
angina (n=40), but not in those with stable angina (n=40), comparing controls
(n=20); (2) mRNA levels of RANKL were increased in T-cells in unstable angina
patients accompanied by increased expression of RANK in monocytes; (3) strong
immunostaining of OPG/RANKL/RANK was seen within thrombus material obtained at
the site of plaque rupture during acute myocardial infarction; (4) OPG/RANKL/RANK
was expressed in the atherosclerotic plaques of apoE(-/-) mice, with RANKL
located specifically to the plaques; and (5) RANKL enhanced the release of
monocyte chemoattractant peptide-1 in mononuclear cells from unstable angina
patients, and promoted matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in vascular smooth
muscle cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We show enhanced expression of the OPG/RANKL/RANK system both in
clinical and experimental atherosclerosis, with enhanced T-cell expression of
RANKL as an important feature of unstable disease.

PMID: 16424351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Future Cardiol. 2006 Jan;2(1):75-83. doi: 10.2217/14796678.2.1.75.

Role of interleukin-10 in atherogenesis and plaque stabilization.

Halvorsen B(1), Waehre T, Scholz H, Damås JK, Yndestad A, Aukrust P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Rikshospitalet University Hospital, University of Oslo, 0027 Oslo, Norway.
bente.halvorsen@medisin.uio.no

Considerable progress has been made in the understanding of atherogenesis and
atherosclerosis is now considered to be an inflammatory disease of the vessel
wall involving several cell types, such as endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells
and macrophages. Progression of an atheroslerotic lesion can lead to vulnerable
and rupture-prone plaques, causing thrombus formation and the development of
acute coronary syndromes. The balance between inflammatory (e.g., tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha, interleukin-6,) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-10) seems
to be of critical importance in the pathogenesis of plaque formation and
destabilization, and it has recently been suggested that an inflammatory
imbalance in unstable disease with inadequately raised IL-10 levels is also of
importance. This lack of IL-10-mediated responses could promote inflammation,
enhance oxidative stress and foam cell apoptosis, leading to plaque
destabilization and thrombus formation and the development of acute coronary
syndromes. Based on these issues, IL-10 has been postulated as an immunological
scalpel in atherosclerotic disorders. Knowledge of IL-10 as a modulator of plaque
stability may provide multiple opportunities for the treatment and prevention of 
atherosclerotic diseases in the future.

PMID: 19804134  [PubMed]


453. J Cell Mol Med. 2005 Oct-Dec;9(4):818-39.

Pharmacological basis of different targets for the treatment of atherosclerosis.

Saini HK(1), Xu YJ, Arneja AS, Tappia PS, Dhalla NS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research
Centre and Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Canada.

The development of atherosclerotic plaque is a highly regulated and complex
process which occurs as a result of structural and functional alterations in
endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells (SMCs), monocytes/macrophages,
T-lymphocytes and platelets. The plaque formation in the coronary arteries or
rupture of the plaque in the peripheral vasculature in latter stages of
atherosclerosis triggers the onset of acute ischemic events involving myocardium.
Although lipid lowering with statins has been established as an important therapy
for the treatment of atherosclerosis, partially beneficial effects of statins
beyond decreasing lipid levels has shifted the focus to develop newer drugs that 
can affect directly the process of atherosclerosis. Blockade of renin angiotensin
system, augmentation of nitric oxide availability, reduction of Ca(2+) influx,
prevention of oxidative stress as well as attenuation of inflammation, platelet
activation and SMC proliferation have been recognized as targets for drug
treatment to control the development, progression and management of
atherosclerosis. A major challenge for future drug development is to formulate a 
combination therapy affecting different targets to improve the treatment of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16364193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nephrology (Carlton). 2005 Dec;10(6):576-82.

Elevated serum interleukin-18 levels might reflect the high risk of
hospitalization in patients on peritoneal dialysis.

Yano A(1), Nakao K, Sarai A, Akagi S, Kihara T, Morimoto H, Nakamura A, Hiramatsu
M, Nagake Y, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Japan. ai_love_slk@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-18 is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine and plays a
central role in atherosclerotic plaque rupture and accelerates atherosclerosis.
AIM: The aim of this study was to determine serum IL-18 levels in patients on
peritoneal dialysis (PD) and to assess their relationship with hospitalization.
METHODS: Forty-three PD patients and 20 healthy individuals were enrolled in this
study. We investigated the relationship of the serum concentrations of IL-18 and 
other well-established atherosclerotic markers, such as asymmetric
dimethylarginine (ADMA). Hospitalization data from over a 18-month period were
prospectively obtained on all 43 PD patients. Classic factors were entered into a
Cox regression model to predict first hospitalization.
RESULTS: The serum levels of IL-18 in patients on PD were significantly higher
than those of healthy individuals (228.5 +/- 140.3 pg/mL vs 154.8 +/- 44.7 pg/mL,
P < 0.05, respectively). Furthermore, serum IL-18 levels showed a positive
correlation with duration of PD, serum beta2 microglobulin and serum ADMA levels.
Mean serum levels of IL-18 were significantly higher among patients who had
experienced at least one hospitalization than those who had not (279.9 +/- 164.3 
vs 158.5 +/- 43.9 pg/mL, P = 0.0426). Furthermore, the relative risk for first
hospitalization for each increase in IL-18 (pg/mL) levels was associated with a
1.182 (95% confidence interval, 1.012-1.364; P = 0.0071) increase in the risk for
future hospitalization events.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests the elevated serum IL-18 levels might
increase the risk for future hospitalization in patients on PD.

PMID: 16354240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Herz. 2005 Dec;30(8):723-32.

[Atherogenesis: interplay between cholesterol, inflammation and coagulation].

[Article in German]

Fraunberger P(1), Wang Y, Blessing FJ, Seidel D, Walli AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Chemie, Klinikum Grosshadern der
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. peter.fraunberger@med.uni-muenchen.de

It is now generally accepted that, in addition to hypercholesterolemia,
pro-inflammatory and procoagulatory factors play a major role in atherogenesis.
Risk factors such as smoking, hypertension, diabetes and renal diseases alter
lipoprotein profile and composition thus rendering them susceptible to
modification. Modified lipoproteins induce local inflammation possibly due to
activation of nuclear factor (NF-)kappaB and subsequent expression of adhesion
molecules, release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, growth factors and mitogens,
which are mediators for cell growth, proliferation and lipid deposition.
Furthermore, activation of collagenases and proteases in combination with
prothrombotic processes attenuate clot formation, plaque rupture and occlusion of
vessels. Clinical as well as experimental studies suggest that elevated levels of
pro-inflammatory markers may have a diagnostic potential. Thus, a therapeutic
approach which modulates circulating cholesterol levels and improves
pro-inflammatory and procoagulatory situation may prove beneficial as adjuvant
therapy in atherosclerotic disease.

PMID: 16331368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Am Heart Hosp J. 2005 Fall;3(4):249-55.

Clinical implications and mechanisms of plaque rupture in the acute coronary
syndromes.

Klein LW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiology, Rush Medical College, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA. lklein@rush.edu

Coronary atherosclerosis complicated by plaque rupture or disruption and
thrombosis is primarily responsible for the development of acute coronary
syndromes. Plaques with a large extracellular lipid-rich core, a thin fibrous cap
due to reduced collagen content and smooth muscle density, and increased numbers 
of activated macrophages and mast cells appear to be vulnerable to rupture.
Plaque disruption tends to occur at points at which the plaque surface is weakest
and most vulnerable, which coincide with points at which stresses resulting from 
biomechanical and hemodynamic forces acting on plaques are concentrated. Reduced 
matrix synthesis as well as increased matrix degradation predisposes vulnerable
plaques to rupture in response to extrinsic mechanical or hemodynamic stresses.
Modification of endothelial dysfunction and reduction of vulnerability to plaque 
rupture and thrombosis may lead to plaque stabilization. These concepts have
significant clinical implications that are just beginning to be explored and
incorporated into clinical practice. This article reviews the mechanism of
coronary atherosclerosis development and the pathophysiology of acute coronary
syndromes to provide a framework for understanding how plaque passivation might
be accomplished in clinical medicine.

PMID: 16330917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2005 Oct;25(10):869-71.

[Present status and research train of thoughts in integrative medicine on
unstable plaque].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JC(1), Chen KJ, Ahang WG.

Author information: 
(1)Xiyuan Hospital, China Academy of Traditional Chines Medicine, Beijing 100091.
zhangjingchun276@sohu.com

The changing of atherosclerosis (AS) plaque from stable to unstable is closely
related to the incidence of cardio-cerebrovascular events. So, to stabilize AS
plaque become the hot point of the modern study on prevention and treatment of
cardio-cerebrovascular diseases. The formation of AS plaque is a very long and
complicated process with the participation of many factors. However, inflammation
reaction plays an important role in the formation and rupture of unstable plaque.
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) shows latent therapeutic advantages in
stabilizing AS plaque with its characteristics of multi-way, multi-link, and
multi-target point and all-sided treatment as well as its rather milder adverse
reactions. The paper gives a comparatively systematic retrospection of study on
unstable plaque treated by integrated Chinese and Western medicine conducted in
recent years. Combined with the related topics conducted by the authors, they
raise the theory of "unstable plaque is induced by toxinduced by toxin and
stagnation", and introduce the study on the intervention of unstable plaque by
removing toxic substances and activating blood flow. They believe that the
explorative study can provide objective experimental and clinical basis for TCM
therapeutic method in stabilizing AS plaque.

PMID: 16313104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2005 Nov-Dec;14(6):285-93.

Determinants of plaque instability in atherosclerotic vascular disease.

Rao DS(1), Goldin JG, Fishbein MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite numerous advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis, the factors that determine atheromatous plaque instability
remain unclear. The prediction of the vulnerability of a plaque to rupture and
subsequent thrombosis would be useful in guiding development of diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches.
METHODS: Aortas with areas of gross atherosclerosis were obtained from seven
autopsy cases. These were then serially sectioned at 3-mm intervals, analyzed
histologically, and scored as to plaque size, calcification, lipid content,
intraplaque hemorrhage, inflammation, plaque disruption, and plaque thrombosis.
Bivariate correlations and binary multivariate regression analyses were performed
using SPSS software.
RESULTS: Plaque instability was highly correlated with intraplaque hemorrhage,
lipid content, and plaque size. Weaker but statistically significant correlations
were found with inflammation and calcification. However, in multivariate
regression analyses, only plaque size, intraplaque hemorrhage, and lipid content,
independent predictors of plaque instability, were significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Atheromatous plaques may be rendered unstable by increases in size, 
increased intra- and extracellular lipid accumulation, and intraplaque
hemorrhage. Based on these results, diagnostic modalities that detect plaque
size, plaque hemorrhage, and/or lipid content are most likely to be useful in
predicting unstable plaques.

PMID: 16286036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Stroke. 2005 Dec;36(12):2642-7. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Identification of culprit lesions after transient ischemic attack by combined 18F
fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography and high-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging.

Davies JR(1), Rudd JH, Fryer TD, Graves MJ, Clark JC, Kirkpatrick PJ, Gillard JH,
Warburton EA, Weissberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. jrd36@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Carotid endarterectomy is currently guided by
angiographic appearance on the assumption that the most stenotic lesion visible
at angiography is likely to be the lesion from which future embolic events will
arise. However, risk of plaque rupture, the most common cause of
atherosclerosis-related thromboembolism, is dictated by the composition of the
plaque, in particular the degree of inflammation. Angiography may, therefore, be 
an unreliable method of identifying vulnerable plaques. In this study, plaque
inflammation was quantified before endarterectomy using the combination of 18F
fluorodeoxyglucose positron (FDG)-emission tomography (PET) and high-resolution
MRI (HRMRI).
METHODS: Twelve patients, all of whom had suffered a recent transient ischemic
attack, had a severe stenosis in the ipsilateral carotid artery, and were
awaiting carotid endarterectomy underwent FDG-PET and HRMRI scanning. A
semiquantitative estimate of plaque inflammation was calculated for all of the
lesions identified on HRMRI.
RESULTS: In 7 of 12 patients (58%), high FDG uptake was seen in the lesion
targeted for endarterectomy. In the remaining 5 patients, FDG uptake in the
targeted lesion was low. In these 5 patients, 3 had nonstenotic lesions
identified on HRMRI that exhibited a high level of FDG uptake. All 3 of the
highly inflamed nonstenotic lesions were located in a vascular territory
compatible with the patients' presenting symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that angiography may not always identify the
culprit lesion. Combined FDG-PET and HRMRI can assess the degree of inflammation 
in stenotic and nonstenotic plaques and could potentially be used to identify
lesions responsible for embolic events.

PMID: 16282536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Thromb Haemost. 2005 Sep;94(3):504-9.

Postprandial elevation of tissue factor antigen in the blood of healthy adults.

Motton DD(1), Mackman N, Tilley RE, Rutledge JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Clinical Nutrition and Vascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Suite 5303, Genomics and Biomedical Sciences
Facility, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA.
ddmotton@ucdavis.edu

Atherosclerosis is a dynamic disease involving lipid metabolism, inflammation and
thrombosis. A key factor in thrombosis is tissue factor, a small transmembrane
glycoprotein. Tissue factor binds FactorVIIa, and this complex converts Factor X 
to Factor Xa, leading to thrombin generation and fibrin formation. Inhibition of 
this pathway is by tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). Tissue factor is found
sequestered within atherosclerotic plaques, and plaque rupture allows tissue
factor exposure to the circulation, leading to formation of a thrombus. Tissue
factor is also associated with membrane microparticles in the circulation, most
likely released from monocytes activated by an inflammatory event. We hypothesize
that consumption of a typical western diet that is moderate in fat content leads 
to elevated levels of circulating tissue factor that may act as a marker of a
prothrombotic state. Healthy volunteers, aged 18-55, consumed a moderate (40%)
fat meal, with blood taken before and 3.5 and 6 h after the meal. Plasma was
isolated and assayed for plasma triglycerides, tissue factor, thrombin
antithrombin (TAT) complexes, TFPI and TNFalpha. The levels of circulating tissue
factor increased 56% (from 78 pg/ml to 120 pg/ml) 3.5 h after the meal. Levels
decreased, but had not returned to baseline 6 h postprandially. No significant
differences in TAT, TFPI and TNFa levels were observed postprandially. These
results demonstrate increased tissue factor levels in individuals who consumed a 
moderate fat diet. This suggests that the typical western diet may play a larger 
role in cardiovascular disease than merely altering lipid profiles.

PMID: 16268463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Jul;187(1):161-9. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Intraplaque MMP-8 levels are increased in asymptomatic patients with carotid
plaque progression on ultrasound.

Turu MM(1), Krupinski J, Catena E, Rosell A, Montaner J, Rubio F, Alvarez-Sabin
J, Cairols M, Badimon L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, IIBB/CSIC-HSCSP-UAB, Barcelona, Spain.

Carotid atherosclerotic plaque remodelling and increased risk of symptomatic
plaque rupture seem to be partially mediated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).
In this study, we have investigated whether different MMPs are related to carotid
atherosclerosis or to recent ischaemic brain disease. Eighty-four consecutive
patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy for symptomatic and asymptomatic
disease were studied. Plaques were analysed by ultrasound and later by
morphology. Plasma MMP-2, MMP-8 and MMP-9 levels were quantified by ELISA. MMP
expression and activity in carotid plaques was analysed by Western blotting and
in situ zymography. Results were analysed with respect to plaque stability,
morphology, symptomatic disease, presence of vascular risk factors and plasma
markers of acute inflammation as high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP),
fibrinogen, D-dimer and white blood cell counts. Patients with hypoechogenic
plaques on ultrasound had more plasma MMP-8 (p = 0.04) and increased MMP activity
as assessed by in situ zymography. Asymptomatic patients with plaque progression 
had more active intraplaque MMP-8 than asymptomatic patients without plaque
progression. Presence of recent intraplaque haemorrhage or past history of CAD
was related to increased activity of MMPs as assessed by in situ zymography (p < 
0.01, CI 95% 0.8-1.0). Plasma MMP-8 and MMP-9, but not MMP-2 levels, decrease
with time after ischaemic stroke. Patients with hypertension had more intraplaque
active MMP-9 than normotensive (p = 0.03, CI 95% 0.7-1.0). Hypoechogenic carotid 
plaques had increased MMP activity and asymptomatic patients with plaque
progression show increase intraplaque MMP-8 levels.

PMID: 16259988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Clin Cardiol. 2005 Sep;28(9):408-12.

High-sensitivity C-reactive protein as a risk assessment tool for cardiovascular 
disease.

Yeh ET(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Texas-MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030-4095, USA. etyeh@mdanderson.org

Almost half of first cardiovascular events occur in individuals with no known
risk factors. Attempts in the last decade to predict cardiovascular risk more
accurately have led to the emergence of a novel risk factor, C-reactive protein
(CRP), which has proved to be as good a risk predictor as low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol. C-reactive protein is an index of inflammation that is now believed 
to promote directly all stages of atherosclerosis, including plaque rupture. As
measured by high-sensitivity assays, high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) also
independently predicts recurrent events in patients with known coronary artery
diseases. Recent evidence implicates hs-CRP, and thus inflammation, in the
metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus, particularly in women. As a clinical
tool for cardiovascular risk assessment, hs-CRP testing enhances information
provided by lipid screening or global risk assessment. Statin therapy and other
interventions can lower hs-CRP. Whether or not such reductions can prevent
cardiovascular events is under investigation.

PMID: 16250263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2005 Oct;58(10):1197-206.

[New insights towards catheter-based identification of vulnerable plaque].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Granillo GA(1), Regar E, Schaar JA, Serruys PW.

Author information: 
(1)Interventional Cardiology, Thoraxcenter, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Sudden cardiac death or unheralded acute coronary syndromes are common initial
manifestations of coronary atherosclerosis and most such events occur at sites of
non-flow limiting coronary atherosclerosis. Autopsy data suggests that plaque
composition is a key determinant of the propensity of atherosclerotic lesions to 
provoke clinical events. Most of these events are related to plaque rupture and
subsequent thrombotic occlusion at the site of non-flow limiting atherosclerotic 
lesions in epicardial coronary arteries. Detection of these non-obstructive,
lipid rich, high-risk plaques may have an important impact on the prevention of
acute myocardial infarction and sudden death. Currently, there are several
intravascular tools capable of locally evaluating determinants of plaque
vulnerability such as the size of the lipid core, thickness of the fibrous cap,
inflammation within the cap and positive remodeling. These new modalities have
the potential to provide insights into the pathophysiology of the natural history
of coronary plaque by means of prospective studies.

PMID: 16238988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Semin Vasc Med. 2002 Nov;2(4):417-28.

Acute-phase reactants and coronary heart disease.

Koenig W(1), Rosenson RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II-Cardiology, University of Ulm Medical
Center, Ulm, Germany. wolfgang.koenig@medzin.uni-ulm.de

Inflammation is considered to play an essential role in the initiation,
progression, and the final pathophysiological steps of atherosclerosis, plaque
erosion or fissure, and eventually plaque rupture. Prospective studies have
identified several markers of systemic inflammation that are predictors of future
cardiovascular events, not only in apparently healthy subjects, but also in
patients with unstable angina and previous myocardial infarction. Measurement of 
inflammatory markers may add to the predictive value of total and high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol in assessing coronary risk long-term. Various biological 
mechanisms exist that could explain the pathological effects of these
inflammatory molecules. Finally, the results from recent clinical trials indicate
that the net benefit of various compounds in primary and secondary prevention of 
coronary heart disease, like aspirin, statins, and ACE inhibitors, may be
mediated, at least in part, by modifying the consequences of the inflammatory
response on vascular risk. However, further studies are required to address these
associations because the mechanisms that cause an inflammatory response are only 
incompletely understood and deserve further investigation.

PMID: 16222631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Lupus. 2005;14(9):732-5.

T cells and cytokines in atherogenesis.

Liuzzo G(1), Giubilato G, Pinnelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. gliuzzo@hotmail.com

Recent findings suggest that inflammation plays a key role in atherosclerosis
from the earliest stage of lesion initiation, to the ultimate complication of
thrombosis. In patients who died because of acute coronary syndromes (ACS),
coronary atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by the presence of
macrophages, and to a lesser extent T-lymphocytes, at the immediate site of
either plaque rupture or superficial erosion. The rupture-related inflammatory
cells are activated, indicating ongoing inflammation. ACS patients are also
characterized by activated circulating lymphocytes, monocytes and neutrophils,
and by increased concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines and of the highly
sensitive acute phase reactant C-reactive protein. Interestingly, an unusual
subset of T cells, CD4+ CD28null T cells, involved in vascular complication of
rheumatoid arthritis because of their functional profile predisposing for
vascular injury, are expanded in the peripheral blood and infiltrate the coronary
lesions of ACS patients. The presence of activated T lymphocytes implies
antigenic stimulation, but the nature of such antigen(s) remains to be
investigated. Several autoantigens expressed in the atherosclerotic plaque,
including oxidized LDL and heat shock proteins, and infectious agents are able to
elicit an immune response. The inflammatory component is not localized to the
'culprit' plaque, but it is diffused to the entire coronary vascular bed, and
involves also the myocardium.

PMID: 16218477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Sep 20;46(6):937-54.

Atherothrombosis and high-risk plaque: part I: evolving concepts.

Fuster V(1), Moreno PR, Fayad ZA, Corti R, Badimon JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute and the Marie-Josee and
Henry R. Kravis Cardiovascular Health Center, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York 10029, USA.

Atherothrombosis is a complex disease in which cholesterol deposition,
inflammation, and thrombus formation play a major role. Rupture of high-risk,
vulnerable plaques is responsible for coronary thrombosis, the main cause of
unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. In
addition to rupture, plaque erosion may also lead to occlusive thrombosis and
acute coronary events. Atherothrombosis can be evaluated according to histologic 
criteria, most commonly categorized by the American Heart Association (AHA)
classification. However, this classification does not include the thin cap
fibroatheroma, the most common form of high-risk, vulnerable plaque. Furthermore,
the AHA classification does not include plaque erosion. As a result, new
classifications have emerged and are reviewed in this article. The disease is
asymptomatic during a long period and dramatically changes its course when
complicated by thrombosis. This is summarized in five phases, from early lesions 
to plaque rupture, followed by plaque healing and fibrocalcification. For the
early phases, the role of endothelial dysfunction, cholesterol transport,
high-density lipoprotein, and proteoglycans are discussed. Furthermore, the
innate and adaptive immune response to autoantigens, the Toll-like receptors, and
the mechanisms of calcification are carefully analyzed. For the advanced phases, 
the role of eccentric remodeling, vasa vasorum neovascularization, and mechanisms
of plaque rupture are systematically evaluated. In the final thrombosis section, 
focal and circulating tissue factor associated with apoptotic macrophages and
circulatory monocytes is examined, closing the link between inflammation, plaque 
rupture, and blood thrombogenicity.

PMID: 16168274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(1):34-43.

Markers of hemostasis and systemic inflammation in heart disease and
atherosclerosis in smokers.

MacCallum PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barts and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. p.k.maccallum@qmul.ac.uk

Smoking is a major cause of both chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
coronary heart disease, the latter being more common in individuals with COPD.
Acute coronary events are usually caused by the development of a platelet-rich
thrombus associated with atheromatous plaque rupture or erosion. Levels of
systemic biomarkers of inflammation and hemostasis may reflect the presence of
atherosclerosis and predisposition to thrombosis, and may allow identification of
"vulnerable plaque" and "vulnerable blood" in "vulnerable patients." Hemostasis
and inflammation, often viewed as separate processes, are integrated closely, and
their response to smoking likely has contributed to the current coronary heart
disease epidemic. Coagulation is initiated after exposure of blood to tissue
factor present in atheromatous plaques. Fibrinogen and other hemostatic factors
important in thrombus formation are influenced by inflammatory stimuli, possibly 
reflecting both vascular and systemic inflammation. Smokers who develop COPD may 
have higher basal levels of inflammatory markers, such as fibrinogen, due to lung
damage, and respiratory infections to which they are prone may further increase
levels, predisposing smokers to coronary events. In summary, smoking predisposes 
to coronary heart disease and the mechanisms may involve proinflammatory and
procoagulant changes. These changes may be more marked in smokers with COPD.

PMID: 16113467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Ital J Anat Embryol. 2005;110(2 Suppl 1):109-15.

Morphological analysis of cell subpopulations within carotid atherosclerotic
plaques.

Businaro R(1), Digregorio M, Riganò R, Profumo E, Buttari B, Leone S, Salvati B, 
Capoano R, D'Amati G, Fumagalli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome,
Italy. rita.businaro@uniroma1.it

Atherosclerosis is considered a chronic inflammatory process, prompted by lipid
accumulation and propagated by cell-mediated mechanisms. The present work was
undertaken to clarify this process by characterizing cellular components of
inflammatory infiltrate localized within atheroma. Cryostat sections of
atherosclerotic lesions obtained from human carotid endarterectomy were analysed 
immunohistochemically by using monoclonal and polyclonal antibody directed
against T cell subpopulations (CD3, CD4, CD8), B cells (CD20), plasma cells
(CD138), macrophages (CD14), mast cells (anti-tryptase). Our results assess that 
T cells are the predominant cell type among plaque infiltrating inflammatory
cells. B cells were detected near the lipid core of atheroma and clusters of
plasma cells were observed within cellular infiltrates in most plaques. Numerous 
tryptase positive mast cells were noticed in many areas of complicated lesions.
Our results indicate the presence of many inflammatory cells within type V and VI
atherosclerotic plaques, suggesting the involvement of those cells in plaque
progression. In fact it was previously shown that stability of atherosclerotic
lesions is influenced by mast cell-released matrix metalloproteinases which
induce plaque rupture and by cytokines and chemokines which increase local
inflammatory response and are produced by lymphocytes and macrophages.

PMID: 16101028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2005 Jul;117(13-14):445-55.

[The role of inflammation in the pathophysiology of acute coronary syndromes].

[Article in German]

Alber HF(1), Suessenbacher A, Weidinger F.

Author information: 
(1)Klinische Abteilung für Kardiologie, Medizinische Universität Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.

All stages of atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by an inflammatory
component, in which T lymphocytes and macrophages orchestrate lesion progression 
and destabilization by releasing cytokines (e.g., interferon-gamma, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha, tissue factor). At the extreme end of this process plaque 
rupture occurs, which may manifest clinically as an acute coronary syndrome.
Hence, measuring this atherosclerosis-inherent inflammation may help predicting
cardiovascular events. Accordingly, different soluble inflammatory markers were
studied for their predictive value in acute coronary syndromes. Special attention
was paid to high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) and soluble CD40 ligand 
(sCD40L). The latter seems not only to be a marker of inflammation and platelet
activation, but is suggested to directly destabilize atherosclerotic plaques by
stimulating pro-inflammatory T lymphocytes. Therefore, reduction of soluble
inflammatory markers is an attractive target for future therapeutic strategies.
Statins and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists, well-established treatments in
acute coronary syndromes, were demonstrated to decrease hs-CRP and sCD40L.
Whether this reduction translates into a better prognosis has to be investigated 
in further studies.

PMID: 16091870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Ann Ital Med Int. 2005 Apr-Jun;20(2):81-9.

[Immune factors in atherosclerosis].

[Article in Italian]

Pasqui AL(1), Bova G, Maffei S, Auteri A.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Medicina Interna, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Scienze
Immunologiche, Università degli Studi di Siena. pasquian@unisi.it

Immune cells play an important role in atheromatous plaque formation and
progression and in the phase of "active plaque" and of the consequent clinical
manifestations. Endothelial dysfunction is the first determinant step in
atherogenesis by inducing the alteration of vasodilating and antithrombotic
properties of the endothelium and of its permeability to lipoproteins.
Circulating monocytes are recruited and internalized and lipoproteins are stored 
in the subendothelial area where they undergo oxidation (oxidized LDL) and are
removed by macrophages by means of non-autoregulated scavenger receptors (foam
cells). Foam cells are able to express surface receptors and to produce soluble
mediators (interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, monocyte chemotactic
protein 1) which attract other monocytes, activate endothelial cells and smooth
muscle cells. Lymphocytes too are present in these first stages of atherogenesis.
If the injurious agents are not removed or nullified by the inflammatory response
and the inflammation progresses, the response changes from a protective to an
injurious response. Recruitment of monocytes and lymphocytes occurs as a result
of the up-regulation of adhesion molecules on both the endothelium and the
leukocytes and the plaque progresses to an advanced lesion. Finally the
activation of monocytes and T cells induces the plaque activation and rupture in 
presence of inducing agents such as oxidized LDL. CD4 lymphocytes are common
components of atheroma and are mainly localized at the sites of rupture in strict
contact with macrophages and smooth muscle cells which express activation surface
molecules and which are able to process and to present the antigen to T cells.
Activated lymphocytes produce proinflammatory cytokines as interferon-gamma which
is able to amplify the inflammatory response but also interleukin-10 which seems 
to possess a regulatory effect. Activated macrophages release metalloproteinases 
and other proteolytic enzymes which cause degradation of the matrix, thinning of 
fibrous cap and plaque destabilization. Both T cells and macrophages produce
cytotoxic factors which contribute to the apoptosis. The process may be
potentiated by the activation of platelets, tissue factor,
coagulation-fibrinolytic system which can contribute to thrombus formation,
plaque rupture and artery occlusion.

PMID: 16052840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Atherosclerosis. 2005 Aug;181(2):295-303. Epub 2005 Apr 2.

In vivo detection of macrophages in a rabbit atherosclerotic model by
time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy.

Marcu L(1), Fang Q, Jo JA, Papaioannou T, Dorafshar A, Reil T, Qiao JH, Baker JD,
Freischlag JA, Fishbein MC.

Author information: 
(1)Biophotonics Research & Technology Development, Department of Surgery,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. lmarcu@bmsrs.usc.edu

Accumulation of numerous macrophages in the fibrous cap is a key identifying
feature of plaque inflammation and vulnerability. This study investigates the use
of time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy (TR-LIFS) as a potential
tool for detection of macrophage foam cells in the intima of atherosclerotic
plaques. Experiments were conducted in vivo on 14 New Zealand rabbits (6 control,
8 hypercholesterolemic) following aortotomy to expose the intimal luminal surface
of the aorta. Tissue autofluorescence was induced with a nitrogen pulse laser
(337 nm, 1 ns). Lesions were histologically classified by the percent of collagen
or macrophage foam cells as well as thickness of the intima. Using parameters
derived from the time-resolved fluorescence emission of plaques, we determined
that intima rich in macrophage foam cells can be distinguished from intima rich
in collagen with high sensitivity (>85%) and specificity (>95%). This study
demonstrates, for the first time, that a time-resolved fluorescence-based
technique can differentiate and demark macrophage content versus collagen content
in vivo. Our results suggest that TR-LIFS technique can be used in clinical
applications for identification of inflammatory cells important in plaque
formation and rupture.

PMCID: PMC2672099
PMID: 16039283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Circ Res. 2005 Aug 19;97(4):305-13. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Interleukin-10 suppresses tissue factor expression in
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages via inhibition of Egr-1 and a serum
response element/MEK-ERK1/2 pathway.

Kamimura M(1), Viedt C, Dalpke A, Rosenfeld ME, Mackman N, Cohen DM, Blessing E, 
Preusch M, Weber CM, Kreuzer J, Katus HA, Bea F.

Author information: 
(1)Department Internal Medicine III, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Atherosclerosis is considered to be an inflammatory disease. Tissue factor (TF), 
a prothrombotic molecule expressed by various cell types within atherosclerotic
plaques, is thought to play an essential role in thrombus formation after
atherosclerotic plaque rupture. Recent studies suggest that the antiinflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10) has many antiatherosclerotic properties.
Therefore, the effects of IL-10 on TF expression in response to inflammation were
investigated. Mouse macrophages were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in 
the presence or absence of IL-10. Pretreatment with IL-10 resulted in a 50%
decrease in TF mRNA expression and TF promoter activity. Binding of early growth 
response gene-1 (Egr-1) to the consensus DNA sequence, a key transcriptional
activator of TF expression in response to inflammation, and the expression of
Egr-1 mRNA were also inhibited by IL-10. This inhibition was independent of the
induction of suppressor of cytokine signaling protein-3 by IL-10. Macrophages
that had been transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing the
murine Egr-1 5'-flanking sequence exhibited reduced reporter gene activity in
response to LPS stimulation with IL-10 pretreatment. Studies with deletion
constructs of the Egr-1 promoter identified the proximal serum response element
SRE3 as a potential regulatory site for the IL-10 mediated suppression of Egr-1
expression. Furthermore, activation of the upstream signal-transduction elements,
such as mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) 1/2, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, and Elk-1 were also inhibited by IL-10 pretreatment.
Taken together, these results demonstrate a pathway for the IL-10 mediated
inhibition of TF expression during inflammation and may explain the
antiatherosclerotic effects of IL-10.

PMID: 16037570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Ann Periodontol. 2002 Dec;7(1):72-8.

Interactions of oral pathogens with toll-like receptors: possible role in
atherosclerosis.

Hajishengallis G(1), Sharma A, Russell MW, Genco RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
gh6@acsu.buffalo.edu

Toll-like receptors (TLR) function as important signal transducers that mediate
innate immune and inflammatory responses to pathogens through pattern recognition
of virulence molecules. Although TLRs mediate protection against infection, it is
also likely that they may have a pathophysiologic role in certain inflammatory
diseases, such as atherosclerosis. In atherosclerotic lesions, endothelial cells 
and macrophages have been shown to upregulate TLR expression and may respond to
TLR agonists of microbial origin, resulting in detrimental inflammatory
reactions. Some of these potential TLR-activating virulence factors may be of
oral origin. The detection in atherosclerotic plaques of DNA specific for
Porphyromonas gingivalis and other periodontal pathogens suggests that these
pathogens disseminate into the systemic circulation and localize in atheromas.
The potential of periodontal and some other oral pathogens to activate TLRs in
vivo is suggested by findings from cell culture experiments on interactions of
selected virulence protein adhesins with TLRs and their coreceptors.
Specifically, we have shown that proinflammatory cytokine induction by P.
gingivalis fimbriae was inhibited by monoclonal antibodies to TLR2, TLR4, CD14,
and beta2 integrins, but not by immunoglobulin isotype controls. Cytokine
induction by Bacteroides forsythus protein A depended heavily on CD14 and TLR2.
We also found that the ability of Streptococcus mutans protein AgI/II to
stimulate cytokine release was partially dependent on CD14 and TLR4. Moreover, P.
gingivalis fimbriae induced TLR-dependent activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and
upregulation of costimulatory molecules in monocytic cells. These proinflammatory
activities have been implicated in the pathogenesis of periodontitis, and similar
inflammatory mechanisms could potentially operate in atherosclerosis. Studies by 
other groups have shown that P. gingivalis is capable of stimulating low-density 
lipoprotein oxidation, foam cell formation, and rupture of atherosclerotic plaque
through induction of matrix metalloproteinases. Interestingly, at least some of
these activities can be induced by TLR agonists (lipopolysaccharide and
heat-shock protein-60) from Chlamydia pneumoniae, a major risk factor in
atherosclerosis. Future research in animal models and in vitro cellular systems
with defined mutations in TLRs may implicate TLR participation in oral
pathogen-mediated atherosclerotic processes, thereby providing a mechanistic
basis for the epidemiological findings linking oral pathogens to atherosclerotic 
disease.

PMID: 16013219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Pharmacol Rep. 2005 May-Jun;57(3):367-72.

Monocyte suppressing action of fenofibrate.

Okopień B(1), Kowalski J, Krysiak R, Łabuzek K, Stachura-Kułach A, Kułach A,
Zieliński M, Herman ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Silesia, Medyków
18, PL 40-752 Katowice, Poland. mbkdokop@mp.pl

Since atherosclerosis has been proven to be an inflammatory disease, it is
obvious that the proper treatment for dyslipidemia should not only correct lipid 
parameters but also inhibit inflammation. Monocytes and monocyte-derived
proinflammatory cytokines are widely known to be involved in the formation and
rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque. The aim of our study was to assess the
effect of fenofibrate, a commonly used hypolipidemic drug, on the release of
interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and monocyte chemoattractant
protein 1 (MCP-1) by monocytes from patients with combined hyperlipidemia.
Fourteen patients with biochemically confirmed type IIb dyslipidemia who did not 
respond to a low-fat diet were treated with micronized fenofibrate for 1 month.
The control group included 12 healthy, normolipidemic, age-matched subjects. To
accurately evaluate the levels of the inflammatory cytokines, we excluded
patients with any inflammatory disease. Monocytes were isolated from peripheral
blood before and after the treatment. IL-1beta, IL-6 and MCP-1 release was
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) after lipopolysaccharide
stimulation. IL-1beta, IL-6 and MCP-1 levels were significantly higher in
hyperlipidemic patients compared to the control (143.9 +/- 6.5 vs. 74.4 +/- 4.4
pg/ml; 8212 +/- 285 vs. 6110 +/- 170 pg/ml; 19.6 +/- 0.9 vs. 12.3 +/- 0.6 ng/ml, 
respectively). Thirty-day fenofibrate treatment decreased the release of IL-1beta
by 43% (143.9 +/- 6.5 vs. 86.2 +/- 5.9 pg/ml), of IL-6 by 22% (8212 +/- 285 vs.
6330 +/- 234 pg/ml), and of MCP-1 by 29% (19.6 +/- 0.9 vs. 14.0 +/- 0.8 ng/ml).
The evaluated cytokines were markedly elevated in patients with type IIb
dyslipidemia. Effective fenofibrate therapy had a significant inhibitory effect
on the release of monocyte-derived inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 15985720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Therapie. 2005 Mar-Apr;60(2):125-36.

[Is fibrinogen a predictor or a marker of the risk of cardiovascular events?].

[Article in French]

Drouet L(1), Bal dit Sollier C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Angio-Hématologie, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.
ludovic.drouet@Irb.aphp.fr

Most cardiovascular events result from a thrombotic complication of an
atherosclerotic lesion. Inflammation plays a central role in both the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and the progression of its complications
(especially plaque rupture). Fibrinogen, on the one hand a marker of inflammation
and on the other a major determinant in thrombosis and haemorrheology, plays a
central role in atherosclerosis and its thrombotic complications. The clinical
data are in agreement with epidemiological data, and show that increased plasma
fibrinogen levels (compared with values in paired controls) are predictive of the
risk of cardiovascular events - both primary cardiovascular events in the general
population and recurrence in patients. Determining the plasma fibrinogen level in
terms of genetic predisposition and environmental factors provides a good example
of the interrelationship between genes and the environment. It must be recognised
that a minimal increase in the fibrinogen level (within the plasma reference
values) is an indicator of a significantly increased risk. This shows why
epidemiological data are not useful for determining cardiovascular risk in
individual patients in daily clinical practice (with the exception of the very
high levels that are infrequently observed).

PMID: 15969315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Atherosclerosis. 2005 Nov;183(1):65-73. Epub 2005 Jun 9.

S18886, a selective TP receptor antagonist, inhibits development of
atherosclerosis in rabbits.

Worth NF(1), Berry CL, Thomas AC, Campbell JH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Vascular Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld 4072, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of S18886, a novel TP (thromboxane A2 and
prostaglandin endoperoxide) receptor antagonist, on the development of aortic
fatty streaks and advanced lesions in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis and
restenosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The right iliac artery of 96 rabbits (8 groups, n=12/group) 
was balloon injured, then the animals were fed a cholesterol-enriched diet for 6 
weeks. In Groups 1-4, concomitant oral administration of S18886 at 5 mg/kg/day
over the 6-week-period reduced the intima to media ratio of lesions in the
uninjured aorta and injured iliac artery, the accumulation of macrophages and the
expression of ICAM-1 compared with 1 mg/kg/day S18886, 30 mg/kg/day aspirin and
placebo, with no effect on body weight or plasma cholesterol levels. In Groups
5-8, 2 weeks of treatment with 5 mg/kg/day S18886 reduced the intima to media
ratio of restenosing lesions when pre-formed iliac artery lesions underwent a
second balloon injury at week 6. The smaller lesions resulting from S18886
treatment correlated with a significant decrease in the neointimal area occupied 
by macrophages, as well as in ICAM-1 expression, with no effect on the smooth
muscle component. Aspirin treatment had no significant effect on the neointimal
smooth muscle component, but partially inhibited macrophage infiltration, without
inhibiting ICAM-1 expression.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of the TP receptor using S18886 causes a significant
decrease in the recruitment of monocyte/macrophages within fatty streaks in the
uninjured aorta and within primary and restenosing atherosclerotic lesions in the
iliac artery of rabbits. Since TP receptor agonists, such as thromboxane A2,
prostanoid endoperoxides and isoprostanes participate in vessel wall inflammation
and are localized and increased in atherosclerotic plaques, treatment with S18886
may enhance atherosclerotic lesion stability by attenuating inflammatory
processes that ultimately lead to plaque rupture.

PMID: 15950232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Eur J Med Res. 2005 May 20;10(5):197-201.

Endothelin-1 induces CD40 but not IL-6 in human monocytes via the proinflammatory
transcription factor NF-kappaB.

Browatzki M(1), Pfeiffer CA, Schmidt J, Kranzhöfer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The vasoactive peptide endothelin-1 (ET-1) may contribute to the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis and its acute complications. Because inflammation of the vessel
wall is a characteristic feature of atherosclerosis, this study investigated the 
effect of ET-1 on the proinflammatory transcription factor NF-kappaB in
monocytes. Monocyte/macrophages are a major source of inflammatory mediators in
atheroma and are located in rupture prone plaque areas. In human monocytes ET-1
caused NF-kappaB activation. Specificity of ET-1-induced NF-kappaB activation was
ascertained by supershift and competition experiments. This ET-1 effect was
blocked by the ET-A-receptor antagonist BQ-123 but not by the ET-B-receptor
antagonist BQ-788. PI-1, a specific inhibitor of the IkappaB-alpha-degrading
proteasome complex, also prevented NF-kappaB activation. ET-1 stimulated
expression of the proinflammatory molecule CD40 but not of the cytokine IL-6 in a
NF-kappaB-dependent manner.CONCLUSION: The data demonstrate the ability of ET-1
to activate inflammatory pathways in human monocytes differentially.

PMID: 15946919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Orv Hetil. 2005 May 15;146(20 Suppl 2):1047-53.

[Endothelial function and ischemic heart disease].

[Article in Hungarian]

Préda I(1), Bencze J, Vargova K.

Author information: 
(1)Országos Gyógyintézeti Központ.

The original hypothesis of the development of human atherosclerosis and ischemic 
heart disease called "response-to-injury" suggested the loss of integrity of the 
endothelium as the first step of the process. The recent version of this
hypothesis emphasizes the term of endothelial dysfunction, that can be triggered 
by any of the well known cardiovascular risk factors. The atherosclerotic
process, starting with endothelial dysfunction is a slow grade inflammatory
process, promoting the oxidation of the low density lipoprotein molecules,
activation of cell adhesion molecules as well as various ligands and cytokines,
and activating immunological processes resulting in the development of unstable
atherosclerotic plaque, followed by plaque rupture and formation of
atherothrombotic lesions. Among the laboratory methods used for the detection of 
endothelial dysfunction, the flow mediated vasodilation (FMD) is increasingly
known. A novel method is the laser Doppler flowmetry, still adapted to routine
clinical tests. Clinical experiments are currently running with the
coronarographic evaluation of intravascular flow velocity (slow coronary flow
phenomenon), and also with the isolation and clinical evaluation of the
circulating endothelial cells in patients with ischemic heart disease.

PMID: 15945232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Feb;184(2):322-9. Epub 2005 Jun 6.

Epstein Barr virus specific T-cells generated from unstable human atherosclerotic
lesions: Implications for plaque inflammation.

de Boer OJ(1), Teeling P, Idu MM, Becker AE, van der Wal AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
P.O. Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. o.j.deboer@amc.uva.nl

OBJECTIVE: T-cell activation is an essential feature of atherosclerotic plaque
inflammation, which eventually may lead to plaque rupture. In this study, we
investigated if EBV, a common herpes virus, is capable of stimulating
atherosclerotic plaque derived T-cells and thus could contribute to
atherosclerotic plaque inflammation.
METHODS: Plaque derived T-cell cultures were established from symptomatic carotid
atherosclerotic plaques of 19 patients. B-cells from the same patients were
transformed with EBV to form lymphoblastoid cell lines (B-LCL) that served as
antigen presenting cells. The proliferation of T-cells in the presence of
autologous B-LCL was analyzed using 3H-thymidine incorporation. The presence of
EBV in atherosclerotic material was analyzed by PCR.
RESULTS: Of the 19 cell obtained T-cell cultures, 11 responded to EBV (58%, mean 
stimulation index: 10.1+/-3.1). PCR analysis showed that EBV DNA was present in
15 of the tissue samples (79%). All the specimens that contained EBV responding
T-cells also contained EBV. EBV specific T-cells secreted granzymes, as
indication of functional cytotoxic potential.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cells and EBV DNA can be frequently
observed in human atherosclerotic plaques. This suggests that a T-cell response
against EBV could contribute to plaque inflammation, and thus to the onset of
acute clinical symptoms.

PMID: 15941569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Intern Med J. 2005 Jun;35(6):331-5.

Elevated circulating levels of matrix metalloproteinase-9 and -2 in patients with
symptomatic coronary artery disease.

Zeng B(1), Prasan A, Fung KC, Solanki V, Bruce D, Freedman SB, Brieger D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Concord Hospital, Vascular Biology Laboratory, ANZAC
Research Institute, University of Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-9 and MMP-2) have been implicated in
development of atherosclerosis and plaque rupture in acute coronary syndromes
(ACS).
AIM: To determine the relationship between circulating MMPs and symptomatic
coronary artery disease.
METHODS: Plasma levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2 were measured in patients with ACS,
stable angina (SA) and in controls, using a quantitative gelatin zymography.
These measurements were correlated with markers of systemic inflammation (hs-CRP)
in all subjects and myocardial injury (troponin T) in patients with ACS.
RESULTS: Plasma MMP-9 in ACS was greater than in SA, and was greater in SA than
in controls (P < 0.01 ACS vs SA and controls, P < 0.01 SA vs control). Plasma
MMP-2 was significantly greater in ACS than SA or controls (P < 0.01 vs SA and
controls). There was strong overall relationship between hs-CRP and MMP-9 (r =
0.65, P < 0.0001) driven by a significant relationship in ACS patients (r = 0.58,
P = 0.02), as there was no significant association in SA or controls. A weaker
overall correlation was found between hs-CRP and MMP-2 (r = 0.39, P = 0.02), but 
no significant relationship was present for either of the two patient subgroups
or controls. There was no correlation between levels of troponin T and MMP-9,
MMP-2 or hs-CRP in ACS patients.
CONCLUSION: Quantitative gelatin zymography identifies increased circulating
levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2 in patients with symptomatic coronary disease. MMP-9
and MMP-2 are higher in ACS than SA patients and might have use as markers of
plaque rupture or instability. The strong relationship between MMP-9 and hs-CRP
in ACS patients suggests MMP-9 might be an additional marker and/or consequence
of the inflammatory component in ACS.

PMID: 15892761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Indian Heart J. 2005 Jan-Feb;57(1):21-30.

Insights into the molecular mechanisms of plaque rupture and thrombosis.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Cedars Sinai
Medical Center and UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.
shahp@cshs.org

PMID: 15852890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Autoimmun Rev. 2005 Mar;4(3):153-61.

TNF-alpha, rheumatoid arthritis, and heart failure: a rheumatological dilemma.

Sarzi-Puttini P(1), Atzeni F, Shoenfeld Y, Ferraccioli G.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, University Hospital L. Sacco, Via GB Grassi 74, 20157
Milan, Italy. sarzi@tiscali.it

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is responsible for 35-50% of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) deaths, whereas, in the general UK adult population, coronary heart disease 
is responsible for 1/4 deaths in males and 1/5 deaths in female. This increased
risk may be attributable to RA-specific risk factors such as
hyperhomocysteinemia, disease-related dyslipidemia or vascular inflammation, or
to morbidity related to medications and high levels of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). The possible roles of TNF-alpha in the development of
atherosclerosis include the recruitment of inflammatory cells to the site of
injury or the promotion of adverse vascular smooth muscle cell remodelling.
TNF-alpha may also act as a proinflammatory factor in plaque rupture.
Anticytokine therapy could prove beneficial in the treatment of patients with
heart failure. While early studies supported this hypothesis, anti-TNF strategies
have not demonstrated salutary benefits in large multicenter randomized and
placebo-controlled clinical trials in patients with symptomatic heart failure.
There is a variety of possible explanations for the failure of anti-TNF therapy: 
(1) TNF antagonism has untoward effects in the setting of heart failure; (2) the 
biological agents used in the trials were intrinsically toxic; (3) sex and race
may have important implications in the outcome after anticytokine therapy; (4)
the TNF-alpha protein contains a polymorphism, and, in fact, genoma plays a role 
in modifying the pharmacologic response to anticytokines; (5) anti-TNF-alpha
approaches could have had pharmacodynamic interactions with other heart failure
medications; and (6) the patients in these trials may have been inappropriately
selected. These disappointing results may determine controversial attitude in the
long-term treatment with anti-TNF agents in RA or Crohn's disease. The effects of
TNF-alpha blockers on incident cases of congestive heart failure (CHF) in RA are 
controversial. The available published data suggest the following: (a) RA
patients with history of CHF and a concomitant indication for the use of
TNF-alpha blockers do not need a baseline cardiac evaluation to screen for heart 
failure; (b) patients with well-compensated mild CHF New York Heart Association
(NYHA) classes I and II and a concomitant indication for the use of TNF-alpha
blockers should be evaluated at baseline and then be closely monitored for any
clinical signs of worsening heart failure; and (c) patients with (NYHA) class III
or IV heart failure should not be treated with TNF-alpha blockers in any case.

PMID: 15823501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 18;328(3):790-3.

Bisphosphonates induce inflammation and rupture of atherosclerotic plaques in
apolipoprotein-E null mice.

Shimshi M(1), Abe E, Fisher EA, Zaidi M, Fallon JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Mount Sinai Bone Program, The Zena and Michael A. 
Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
07936-1080, USA. mona.shimshi@pharma.novartis.com

The apolipoprotein E knockout (Apo-E-/-) mouse is a well-known model of
atherosclerosis. Bisphosphonates, through their affinity to hydroxyapatite, are
known to reduce arterial calcification in several animal models. Thus, we
examined the effect of two therapeutically used oral bisphosphonates, alendronate
and risedronate, on plaque formation in the Apo-E-/- mouse. The drugs were
administered by gavage to 16-week-old Apo-E-/- mice for 8 weeks. At 8 weeks,
there was no difference in bone mineral density (BMD) of the alendronate- and
risedronate-treated mice at any site. A time-dependent increase in BMD was
demonstrated in Apo-E-/- mice with risedronate (p<0.01). Histological evaluation 
revealed that both bisphosphonates caused atherosclerotic plaque rupture. Five of
17 mice had severe inflammation with or without plaque rupture, while seven mice 
showed inflammation, but without plaque rupture. Neither caspase 3 nor
metalloproteinases 2 and 9 were increased in ruptured plaques on
immunocytochemistry. Quantitative measurements of arterial caliber remained
unaffected. Our finding of plaque inflammation and rupture in
bisphosphonate-treated Apo-E-/- mice may provide the first animal model for
studies aimed at characterizing mechanisms of plaque rupture in animal models.

PMID: 15694415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Thromb Haemost. 2005 Feb;3(2):254-67.

Oxidative stress in atherogenesis and arterial thrombosis: the disconnect between
cellular studies and clinical outcomes.

Madamanchi NR(1), Hakim ZS, Runge MS.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, Department of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Atherosclerosis is a multifactorial disease for which the molecular etiology of
many of the risk factors is still unknown. As no single genetic marker or test
accurately predicts cardiovascular death, phenotyping for markers of inflammation
may identify the individuals at risk for vascular diseases. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) are key mediators of signaling pathways that underlie vascular
inflammation in atherogenesis, starting from the initiation of fatty streak
development through lesion progression to ultimate plaque rupture. Various animal
models of atherosclerosis support the notion that ROS released from NAD(P)H
oxidases, xanthine oxidase, lipoxygenases, and enhanced ROS production from
dysfunctional mitochondrial respiratory chain indeed have a causatory role in
atherosclerosis and other vascular diseases. Human investigations also support
the oxidative stress hypothesis of atherogenesis. This is further supported by
the observed impairment of vascular function and enhanced atherogenesis in animal
models that have deficiencies in antioxidant enzymes. The importance of oxidative
stress in atherosclerosis is further emphasized because of its role as a unifying
mechanism across many vascular diseases. The main contraindicator for the role
oxidative stress plays in atherosclerosis is the lack of effectiveness of
antioxidants in reducing primary endpoints of cardiovascular death and morbidity.
However, this lack of effectiveness by itself does not negate the existence or
causatory role of oxidative stress in vascular disease. Lack of proven markers of
oxidative stress, which could help to identify a subset of population that can
benefit from antioxidant supplementation, and the complexity and subcellular
localization of redox reactions, are among the factors responsible for the mixed 
outcomes in the use of antioxidants for the prevention of cardiovascular
diseases. To better understand the role of oxidative stress in vascular diseases,
future studies should be aimed at using advances in mouse and human genetics to
define oxidative stress phenotypes and link phenotype with genotype.

PMID: 15670030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2004 Dec;30(6):665-72.

Pathobiology of atherosclerosis--a brief review.

Kher N(1), Marsh JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA.

Considerable progress has been made recently in understanding the pathobiology of
atherosclerosis. To a significant degree it is an inflammatory disease of the
vessel wall. Progression of atherosclerosis or its stabilization reflects the
tension between cytokines and effectors that play both an inhibiting and a
facilitating role in the progression of atherosclerosis, including
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
-alpha, and MCP-1. The response to injury model remains central to our
understanding of atherogenesis. Numerous factors may initiate endothelial injury,
including mechanical factors (hypertension and high shear stress in the artery), 
homocysteine, oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL), possibly infectious agents 
such as Chlamydia, viruses, and toxins such as nicotine. These factors lead to
endothelial cells' increasing expression of receptors for LDL and increased
adherence of monocytes and macrophages and T cells. Progression of
atherosclerosis can lead to the development of a plaque that is vulnerable to
rupture and that would then produce an acute coronary syndrome. In addition to
standard biomarkers and angiographic approaches for detecting plaque rupture,
novel diagnostic approaches are under development, including near infrared
spectroscopy, catheter-based thermography, and optical coherence tomography. Our 
better understanding of the atherosclerotic plaque provides multiple
opportunities for interdicting arterial injury, and the response to it.

PMID: 15630673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Physiol Rev. 2005 Jan;85(1):1-31.

Dual role of matrix metalloproteinases (matrixins) in intimal thickening and
atherosclerotic plaque rupture.

Newby AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, United Kingdom.
A.Newby@bris.ac.uk

Intimal thickening, the accumulation of cells and extracellular matrix within the
inner vessel wall, is a physiological response to mechanical injury, increased
wall stress, or chemical insult (e.g., atherosclerosis). If excessive, it can
lead to the obstruction of blood flow and tissue ischemia. Together with
expansive or constrictive remodeling, the extent of intimal expansion determines 
final lumen size and vessel wall thickness. Plaque rupture represents a failure
of intimal remodeling, where the fibrous cap overlying an atheromatous core of
lipid undergoes catastrophic mechanical breakdown. Plaque rupture promotes
coronary thrombosis and myocardial infarction, the most prevalent cause of
premature death in advanced societies. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) can
act together to degrade the major components of the vascular extracellular
matrix. All cells present in the normal and diseased blood vessel wall upregulate
and activate MMPs in a multistep fashion driven in part by soluble cytokines and 
cell-cell interactions. Activation of MMP proforms requires other MMPs or other
classes of protease. MMP activation contributes to intimal growth and vessel wall
remodeling in response to injury, most notably by promoting migration of vascular
smooth muscle cells. A broader spectrum and/or higher level of MMP activation,
especially associated with inflammation, could contribute to pathological matrix 
destruction and plaque rupture. Inhibiting the activity of specific MMPs or
preventing their upregulation could ameliorate intimal thickening and prevent
myocardial infarction.

PMID: 15618476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 Dec 21;44(12):2293-300.

New aspects in the pathogenesis of diabetic atherothrombosis.

Moreno PR(1), Fuster V.

Author information: 
(1)Zena and Michael Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, PO Box 1030, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
Pedro.Moreno@msnyuhealth.org

Diabetes mellitus is increasing worldwide, resulting from the interaction of
obesity, inflammation, and hyperglycemia. Activated immunity and cytokine
production lead to insulin resistance and other components of the metabolic
syndrome, establishing the link between diabetes and atherosclerosis.
Hyperglycemia-induced endothelial dysfunction is mediated by increased oxidative 
stress, a promoter of adventitial inflammation and vasa vasorum
neovascularization in experimental models of diabetic atherosclerosis. Recent
studies have documented increased inflammation, neovascularization, and
intraplaque hemorrhage in human diabetic atherosclerosis. This inflammatory
microangiopathic process is independently associated with plaque rupture, leading
to coronary thrombosis. Tissue factor, the most potent trigger of the coagulation
cascade, is increased in diabetic patients with poor glycemic control.
Circulating tissue factor microparticles are also associated with apoptosis of
plaque macrophages, closing the link among inflammation, plaque rupture, and
blood thrombogenicity. High-density lipoproteins, responsible for free
cholesterol removal, are reduced in patients with insulin resistance and
diabetes. High-density lipoprotein therapy leads to a significant decrease in
plaque macrophages and increase in smooth-muscle cells. These beneficial effects 
may be responsible for coronary plaque stabilization in patients treated with
recombinant Apolipoprotein A-I Milano/phospholipid complex. Finally, peroxisomal 
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are now considered the nuclear
transcriptional regulators of atherosclerosis. Three subfamilies, including
PPAR-alpha, -delta, and -gamma, have been identified with crucial roles in lipid 
metabolism, plaque inflammation, expression of adhesion molecules and cytokines, 
and regulation of matrix metalloproteinases. Multiple experimental studies have
documented plaque stabilization with PPAR-gamma agonists, a group of medications 
holding great promise in the treatment of diabetes atherosclerosis.

PMID: 15607389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Herz. 2004 Dec;29(8):795-801.

Time-dependent changes of hs-CRP serum concentration in patients with non-ST
elevation acute coronary syndrome.

Jahn J(1), Hellmann I, Maass M, Giannitsis E, Dalhoff K, Katus HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Borromäus Hospital, Leer, Germany.
jahn@borro-leer.de

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is typically associated with a low-grade vascular
inflammation that can be measured with the highly sensitive C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP) assay. Actually, acute coronary syndromes are thought to result from
plaque rupture which is induced by the inflammatory process in the
atherosclerotic tissue. Therefore, it is interesting to discuss the value of
follow-up measurements of hs-CRP in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The hs-CRP concentration of 133 patients consecutively
admitted with an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) was measured on admission and
after 6 months. The final assessment after 3 years was structured by
questionnaire.
RESULTS: 17 cardiac events occurred within 6 months, 30 during the following 3
years. The hs-CRP levels (median +/- SEM) decreased significantly (p < 0.001)
from baseline (3.9 +/- 1.3 mg/l) to follow-up (2.9 +/- 0.9 mg/l). Subdivision
according to cardiac events during the first observation period confirmed this
decrease in patients without events (baseline: 3.9 +/- 1.5 mg/l, follow-up: 2.9
+/- 0.9 mg/l; p < 0.001), whereas patients with events showed a persistent
elevation (baseline: 3.8 +/- 0.9 mg/l, follow-up: 4.1 +/- 1.0 mg/l; p = 0.426).
Patients who developed a further event during the 6-month period showed hs-CRP
levels at follow-up that were > 60% of the initial level. Interestingly, 80% of
the events within the following 3 years occurred in patients with an hs-CRP level
above this discriminator. With a follow-up hs-CRP value above this discriminator 
the relative risk of suffering an event was 3.4 (95% confidence interval
1.27-8.9; p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Patients with a non-ST elevation ACS who showed no event within 6
months are characterized by a decrease in hs-CRP levels from baseline to
follow-up. Most events in the observation period of 3 years occurred in patients 
with follow-up hs-CRP levels > 60% of the initial level. Therefore, it was
hypothesized that a repeated measurement of hs-CRP levels in CAD patients could
help to discriminate those at high risk of further events.

PMID: 15599677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Herz. 2004 Dec;29(8):769-76.

[Acute coronary syndrome and inflammation. Biomarkers for diagnostics and risk
stratification].

[Article in German]

Trepels T(1), Zeiher AM, Fichtlscherer S.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik IV, Kardiologie, Klinikum der
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main.

Inflammation plays a pivotal role in atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease. 
Inflammatory processes of the coronary arterial wall are involved in plaque
formation, progression and, finally, plaque instability consecutively leading to 
the clinical manifestations of stable coronary artery disease or acute coronary
syndromes (unstable angina, non-ST elevation and ST elevation myocardial
infarction). Acute coronary syndromes result from plaque rupture or erosion
leading to local thrombus formation with consecutive necrosis of myocytes due to 
ischemia, which is associated with widespread and diffuse pancoronary and
panmyocardial inflammation. Accordingly, markers of myocardial necrosis (e. g.,
cardiac troponins) do have crucial diagnostic and prognostic value. In case of
troponin-negative acute coronary syndromes, however, markers of inflammation
emerged as potentially useful tools for risk stratification. C-reactive protein
has been shown to serve as a powerful predictor of future cardiovascular events
following acute coronary syndromes, even if troponins are not (yet) positive.
Moreover, a variety of pro- (soluble CD40 ligand, placental growth factor,
interleukin-6, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, myeloperoxidase, monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1) and anti-inflammatory markers (interleukin-10, activin
A) have been suggested to provide relevant prognostic information in patients
with acute coronary syndrome. However, the clinical utility of these novel
markers has not been established so far.

PMID: 15599673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2004;42(10):1132-9.

Time course of systemic markers of inflammation in patients presenting with acute
coronary syndromes.

Brueckmann M(1), Bertsch T, Lang S, Sueselbeck T, Wolpert C, Kaden JJ, Jaramillo 
C, Huhle G, Borggrefe M, Haase KK.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Medicine Mannheim,
University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
martina.brueckmann@med.ma.uni-heidelberg.de

Inflammation within coronary plaques may cause an acute coronary syndrome by
promoting rupture and erosion. It was the aim of this study to examine whether
markers of inflammation derive from a cardiac or extracardiac source and how
their levels develop over time. Blood samples were taken from patients with acute
coronary syndromes (ACS) with proven atherosclerotic lesion(s) of the left
coronary artery (n=13) and from control patients without coronary artery disease 
(n=13). Blood was taken from the femoral vein and the coronary sinus vein before 
and after coronary angioplasty (day 0) and on days 1 and 120. Levels of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-1-receptor
antagonist (IL-1 ra) and soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L) were higher in ACS patients
as compared to controls and remained elevated up to day 120. In the long-term
time course these markers of inflammation and plaque remodeling slightly
decreased in ACS patients. There were no statistically significant differences
detectable in the levels of TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-1 beta, IL-10, IL-1 ra, sCD40L
and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in the blood of ACS patients taken
from a cardiac source as compared to an extracardiac source (coronary sinus vs.
femoral vein). This study demonstrates the importance of a systemic inflammatory 
condition in patients with ACS, in whom markers of inflammation are increased as 
compared to controls. During long-term follow-up the pro-inflammatory activity
remains elevated in ACS patients, supporting the concept of a systemic rather
than a local vascular inflammation contributing to the development of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 15552272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Jan;25(1):29-38. Epub 2004 Nov 11.

Oxidative stress and vascular disease.

Madamanchi NR(1), Vendrov A, Runge MS.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, Department of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7005, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Apr;25(4):e37; author reply e37.

Growing evidence indicates that chronic and acute overproduction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) under pathophysiologic conditions is integral in the
development of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). These ROS can be released from
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (phosphate) oxidase, xanthine oxidase,
lipoxygenase, mitochondria, or the uncoupling of nitric oxide synthase in
vascular cells. ROS mediate various signaling pathways that underlie vascular
inflammation in atherogenesis: from the initiation of fatty streak development
through lesion progress to ultimate plaque rupture. Various animal models of
oxidative stress support the notion that ROS have a causal role in
atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular diseases. Human investigations also
support the oxidative stress hypothesis of atherosclerosis. Oxidative stress is
the unifying mechanism for many CVD risk factors, which additionally supports its
central role in CVD. Despite the demonstrated role of antioxidants in cellular
and animal studies, the ineffectiveness of antioxidants in reducing
cardiovascular death and morbidity in clinical trials has led many investigators 
to question the importance of oxidative stress in human atherosclerosis. Others
have argued that the prime factor for the mixed outcomes from using antioxidants 
to prevent CVD may be the lack of specific and sensitive biomarkers by which to
assess the oxidative stress phenotypes underlying CVD. A better understanding of 
the complexity of cellular redox reactions, development of a new class of
antioxidants targeted to specific subcellular locales, and the phenotype-genotype
linkage analysis for oxidative stress will likely be avenues for future research 
in this area as we move toward the broader use of pharmacological and
regenerative therapies in the treatment and prevention of CVD.

PMID: 15539615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Circ Res. 2004 Oct 29;95(9):858-66.

Chemokines in the pathogenesis of vascular disease.

Charo IF(1), Taubman MB.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, PO Box 419100, San Francisco,
CA 94141-9100, USA. icharo@gladstone.ucsf.edu

Our increasing appreciation of the importance of inflammation in vascular disease
has focused attention on the molecules that direct the migration of leukocytes
from the blood stream to the vessel wall. In this review, we summarize roles of
the chemokines, a family of small secreted proteins that selectively recruit
monocytes, neutrophils, and lymphocytes to sites of vascular injury,
inflammation, and developing atherosclerosis. Chemokines induce chemotaxis
through the activation of G-protein-coupled receptors, and the receptors that a
given leukocyte expresses determines the chemokines to which it will respond.
Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1), acting through its receptor CCR2,
appears to play an early and important role in the recruitment of monocytes to
atherosclerotic lesions and in the formation of intimal hyperplasia after
arterial injury. Acute thrombosis is an often fatal complication of
atherosclerotic plaque rupture, and recent evidence suggests that MCP-1
contributes to thrombin generation and thrombus formation by generating tissue
factor. Because of their critical roles in monocyte recruitment in vascular and
nonvascular diseases, MCP-1 and CCR2 have become important therapeutic targets,
and efforts are underway to develop potent and specific antagonists of these and 
related chemokines.

PMID: 15514167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Circulation. 2004 Nov 2;110(18):2843-50. Epub 2004 Oct 25.

Arterial neovascularization and inflammation in vulnerable patients: early and
late signs of symptomatic atherosclerosis.

Fleiner M(1), Kummer M, Mirlacher M, Sauter G, Cathomas G, Krapf R, Biedermann
BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Bruderholz, Bruderholz,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is complicated by cardiovascular events such as
myocardial infarction, stroke, or peripheral arterial occlusive disease.
Inflammation and pathological neovascularization are thought to precipitate
plaque rupture or erosion, both causes of arterial thrombosis and cardiovascular 
events. We tested the hypothesis that arterial inflammation and angiogenic events
are increased throughout the arterial tree in vulnerable patients, ie, in
patients who suffered from cardiovascular events, compared with patients who
never suffered from complications of atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a postmortem study, we quantified the inflammatory
infiltrate and microvascular network in the arterial wall of iliac, carotid, and 
renal arteries. Tissue microarray technology was adapted to investigate
full-thickness arterial sectors. We compared 22 patients with symptomatic
atherosclerosis with 27 patients who never had suffered from any cardiovascular
event. The absolute intimal macrophage content was 2- to 4-fold higher in
vulnerable patients at all 3 arterial sites analyzed (P<0.05). Patients with
symptomatic atherosclerosis had a denser network of vasa vasorum than patients
with asymptomatic disease (33+/-2 versus 25+/-2 adventitial microvessels per 1
mm2; P=0.008). Hyperplasia of vasa vasorum was an early and macrophage
infiltration was a late sign of symptomatic atherosclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: High intimal macrophage content and a hyperplastic network of vasa
vasorum characterize vulnerable patients suffering from symptomatic
atherosclerosis. These changes are uniformly present in different arterial beds
and support the concept of symptomatic atherosclerosis as a panarterial disease.

PMID: 15505090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Rinsho Byori. 2004 Aug;52(8):686-92.

[Inflammatory markers and cytokines in cardiovascular disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogiwara F(1), Takahashi M, Ikeda U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Science, Department of Organ Regeneration, Shinshu 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto 390-8621.

Inflammatory processes play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
and mediate the stages of atheroma development from initial leukocyte recruitment
to eventual rupture of the unstable atherosclerotic plaque. Recent investigations
demonstrated that several inflammatory markers are considered as new predictable 
risk factors for atherosclerosis and cardiac events. Among these markers,
C-reactive protein (CRP) has been most widely studied. CRP is produced in the
liver in response to interleukin-6 (IL-6), it is an acute phase reactant and used
as a general inflammatory marker. High-sensitivity-CRP (hs-CRP) which could
detect a small amount of CRP was recently developed, and numerous large-scale,
prospective studies have found that elevated baseline levels of hs-CRP are
independent predictor of cardiovascular events. Inflammatory cytokines such as
IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) have also been evaluated as
potential tools for prediction of the cardiovascular events. In this review, we
focused on the recent reports and potential use of the inflammatory markers and
cytokines as a predictable tool for the cardiovascular events.

PMID: 15478624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Free Radic Res. 2004 Jun;38(6):541-51.

Dual role of oxidized LDL on the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

Robbesyn F(1), Salvayre R, Negre-Salvayre A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-466, CHU Rangueil, 31403 Toulouse, Cedex 4, France.

Atherosclerosis is a slowly evolutive age-linked disease of large arteries,
characterized by a local lipid deposition associated with a chronic inflammatory 
response, leading potentially to acute plaque rupture, thrombosis and ischemic
heart disease. Atherogenesis is a complex sequence of events associating first
expression of adhesion molecules, recruitment of mononuclear cells to the
endothelium, local activation of leukocytes and inflammation, lipid accumulation 
and foam cell formation. Low density lipoproteins (LDLs) become atherogenic after
undergoing oxidation by vascular cells, that transform them into highly
bioreactive oxidized LDL (oxidized LDLs). Oxidized LDLs are involved in foam cell
formation, and trigger proatherogenic events such as overexpression of adhesion
molecules, chemoattractant agents growth factors and cytokines involved in the
inflammatory process, cell proliferation and apoptosis. Moreover, this toxic
effect of oxidized LDLs plays probably a role in plaque erosion/rupture and
subsequent atherothrombosis. Several biological effects of oxidized LDLs are
mediated through changes in the activity of transcription factors and
subsequently in gene expression. Oxidized LDLs exert a biphasic effect on the
redox-sensitive transcription factor NF-kappaB, which can be activated thereby
up-regulating proinflammatory gene expression, such as adhesion molecules, tissue
factor, scavenger receptor LOX-1. On the other hand, higher concentrations of
oxidized LDLs may inhibit NF-kappaB activation triggered by inflammatory agents
such as LPS, and may thereby exert an immunosuppressive effect. This review is an
attempt to clarify the mechanism by which oxidized LDLs may up- or down-regulate 
NF-kappaB, the role of NF-kappaB activation (or inhibition), and the consequences
of the oxidized LDLs-mediated NF-kappaB dysregulation and their potential
involvement in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 15346645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2003 Mar;1(1):65-70.

Inflammation and coronary artery disease.

Ikeda U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
uikeda@jichi.ac.jp

Several evidences, ranging from in vitro experiments, pathologic analysis and
epidemiologic studies, show that atherosclerosis is intrinsically an inflammatory
disease. The plasma concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its hepatic
by-product, C-Reactive Protein (CRP), appear to reflect the intensity of occult
plaque inflammation and by inference may determine the vulnerability of plaque
rupture. The monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) plays a crucial role in
initiating coronary artery disease by recruiting monocytes/macrophages to the
vessel wall. This leads to the formation of atherosclerotic lesions and also
increases the vulnerability of the plaque. Indeed, circulating IL-6 and MCP-1
levels are elevated in patients with acute myocardial infarction, and also in
patients with unstable angina, but not in those with stable angina. The plasma
IL-6 and MCP-1 concentrations are also increased after percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI), and late restenosis is correlated with an increase in IL-6 or
MCP-1 concentrations after the procedure. This finding suggests that the
expression of IL-6 and MCP-1 may not only be related to the instability of
atheromatous plaques, but also to the formation of restenotic lesions after PCI. 
The development of drugs specifically targeted against IL-6 and MCP-1 may be
useful in the prevention of plaque formation, myocardial infarction and
restenosis.

PMID: 15320854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2004 Jul;2(3):249-58.

Endothelin-1 and endothelin converting enzyme-1 in human atherosclerosis--novel
targets for pharmacotherapy in atherosclerosis.

Ihling C(1), Bohrmann B, Schaefer HE, Technau-Ihling K, Loeffler BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Freiburg, Albertsrabetae 19, 79104
Freiburg/Germany. ktechnau-ihling@ gmx.de

The role of chronic inflammation in the pathogenesis of the acute coronary
syndromes has received increasing attention since active plaques rich in
macrophages (Mphi's) are more prone to rupture whereas plaques rich in
myofibroblasts are considered to be stable. Functionally, active plaques show a
locally enhanced vasoreactivity. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) a potent vasoconstrictor
acts in a paracrine fashion to regulate vascular tone. ET-1 is also produced by
inflammatory cells suggesting a role for ET-1 in inflammation. Additionally, ET-1
is a mitogen. Endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE-1) activates ET-1 and may thus 
contribute to the regulation of vascular tone and cell growth during
atherosclerosis. We evaluated the presence of ECE-1 and big ET-1/ET-1 and the
activity of ECE-1 in different plaque types. Together with ET-1, ECE-1 is present
in endothelial cells (ECs), vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and Mphi's.
ECE-1 activity and ET-1-immunoreactivity (IR) both are upregulated during the
progression of atherosclerosis from a non-inflammatory to an inflammatory stage. 
Thus, enhanced production of active ET-1 may contribute to cell growth and
regulation of vascular tone in advanced plaques and also in very early stages of 
atherosclerosis. Furthermore, we examined the presence of ET-1 in coronary plaque
tissue obtained by directional coronary atherectomy. ET-1 IR localized to plaque 
components indicative of chronic inflammation. Semiquantitative analysis of ET-1 
IR revealed significantly higher staining grades in active coronary lesions
compared with nonactive lesions. The increased ET-1 content in active coronary
lesions may be beneficial to the stabilization of the vessel wall after plaque
rupture and disadvantageous because it may lead to vasospasm and to the
progression of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 15320823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2004 Feb;17(1):35-44.

Evolving concepts in the triad of atherosclerosis, inflammation and thrombosis.

Corti R(1), Hutter R, Badimon JJ, Fuster V.

Author information: 
(1)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, The Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Recent developments into antherothrombosis, the leading cause of morbidity and
mortality in Western Society, may help to change our treatment strategy to a more
casual approach. The composition of the atherosclerotic plaque, rather than the
percent stenosis, appears to be a critical predictor for both risk of plaque
rupture and subsequent thrombogenicity. A large lipid core, rich in tissue factor
(TF) and inflammatory cells including macrophages, and a thin fibrous cap with
compromise of its structural integrity by matrix degrading enzymes, such as
metalloproteinases (MMPs), render a lesion susceptible to rupture and subsequent 
acute thrombosis. Thrombosis may lead to a complete occlusion or, in the case of 
mural thrombus or intraplaque hemorrhage, to plaque progression. Disruption of a 
vulnerable or unstable plaque (type IV and Va lesions of the AHA classification) 
with a subsequent change in plaque geometry and thrombosis may result in an acute
coronary syndrome. The high-risk plaque tend to be relatively small, but soft or 
vulnerable to "passive" disruption because of high lipid content. Inflammatory
processes are important components of all stages of atherosclerotic development, 
including plaque initiation and disruption. As such the early steps in
atherosclerotic lesion formation are the over expression of endothelial adhesive 
protein (i.e. selectins, VCAM and ICAM), chemotactic factors (MCP-1), growth
factors (M-CSF), and cytokines (IL-2) that will facilitate the recruitment,
internalization and survival of blood-borne inflammatory cells into the vascular 
wall. Macrophages, following what appears to be a defense mission by protecting
the vessel wall from excess lipid accumulation, may eventually undergo apoptosis 
with release of MMPs and TF. Specific cell recruitment in the vessel wall and
build-up of the extracellular matrix are coordinated by a wide variety of
stimulators and inhibitors. Active interaction of immune competent cells within
the atherosclerotic lesions appears to play a pivotal role in the control of
atherosclerotic plaque evolution and, therefore, deserves particular attention
from the research community with the ultimate goal of improving preventive and
therapeutic medical approaches. Inflammation, thrombosis and atherosclerosis are 
interdependent and define a triad within the complex pathogenic process of
atherothrombosis.

PMID: 15277786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Semin Vasc Med. 2003 Nov;3(4):347-54.

Pathophysiology of atherosclerotic plaque development and rupture: an overview.

Rohde LE(1), Lee RT.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Medical Post-Graduation Program, Medical
School of Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Atherosclerosis is predominantly a clinically silent process, and a substantial
percentage of patients are first aware of its consequences through the acute and 
catastrophic event of thrombosis. Extensive basic and clinical research in the
1990s revealed that plaque disruption initiates the majority of thromboses.
Furthermore, recent studies indicate that inflammation plays a major role in the 
pathophysiology, from initiation of the atheroma to the actual thrombosis itself.
Attention has now focused on morphological, mechanical, and biochemical
characteristics that increase plaque vulnerability, as determination of these
features may allow identification of plaques that are most likely to cause
symptoms and acute events in the future. This article reviews basic
pathophysiologic aspects of atherosclerotic plaque development and rupture to
provide the necessary background for understanding the crucial role of
inflammation in acute coronary syndromes.

PMID: 15199441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Med Hypotheses. 2004;63(1):100-2.

Atheroscleritis is a more rational term for the pathological entity currently
known as atherosclerosis.

Li JJ(1), Fang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Benmin Hospital, Wuhan University School of Medicine, Wuhan 430060, PR China. 
lijnjn@yahoo.com.cn

The term "atheroma", a Latin word was first used in 1755 by Albrecht von Halles
to designate the plaque deposited on the innermost layer of systemic artery
walls. In 1940, however, Félix Marchand suggested the word "atherosclerosis"
should be better instead of "atheroma", which is derived from two Greek roots:
athéré means gruel or porridge and sclerosis signifies hardening. It is obviously
an improvement over the older designation arteriosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is
still used up to data because it describes the two components of plaque: the
lipid-filled core of atheroma encased in a shell of sclerosis or fibrosis, which 
presents the feature of atherosclerotic structure. Although atherosclerosis has
been considered to be multi-factorial disease in which genetic, environmental,
metabolic factors have been implicated, the gaps remain in our knowledge of the
etiopathogenesis of atherosclerosis. More recently, there is mounting evidence
that inflammation plays an important role in the initiation, development as well 
as evolution of atherosclerosis. The data from animals as well as humans
indicated that an inflammatory process was involved in all stages of
atherosclerosis appeared in different clinical settings, including atheromatous
development, plaque rupture, restenotic process. The anti-inflammatory approach
has been showed as one of the most promising strategies for atherosclerosis, such
as statin intervention. Based on evidence and in light of the new understanding
that inflammation is an intrinsic part of the process, we would like to propose a
further change of nomenclature, call the disease atheroscleritis.

PMID: 15193358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Circulation. 2004 Jun 1;109(21 Suppl 1):II11-4.

CRP as a mediator of disease.

Yeh ET(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Texas-Houston
Health Science Center, USA. etyeh@mdanderson.org

Of the various hypotheses offered to explain atherosclerosis, inflammation now
appears to provide a key to this pathological process. Inflammation has been
shown to play a major role in precipitating a cascade of events from formation of
the atheromatous lesion in response to vascular injury through lipid ingestion by
macrophages, to subsequent rupture of the lesion, and myocardial infarction.
Atherosclerosis shares many inflammatory features with rheumatoid arthritis (RA),
an autoimmune disease, and drugs that block the inflammatory cytokine pathway now
provide effective treatment for RA. In animal models, blockers of the
inflammatory cytokine pathway appear to block mononuclear cell binding to
arterial plaque. C-reactive protein (CRP), an inflammatory marker, may also play 
a proinflammatory role in activating monocyte chemotactic protein.
Antiatherosclerotic drugs may be exerting some of their beneficial effects by
inhibiting the harmful effects of CRP.

PMID: 15173057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004 Jun;14(3):271-9.

Pathophysiology and biochemistry of cardiovascular disease.

Scott J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
j.scott@imperial.ac.uk

Atherosclerosis is the major cause of cardiovascular disease.
Hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension and cigarette smoking are the common risk
factors for atherosclerosis. These risk factors unite behind a convergence of
mechanism, involving oxidation and inflammation in the artery wall that, with
time, gives rise to characteristic fatty-fibrous lesions. Physical trauma and
inflammation produce lesion rupture, which can lead to clinical events such as
heart attack and stroke, or resolve with plaque growth. Disease progression is
marked by the inflammatory indicator CRP (C-reactive protein). Early indicators
of heart attack are the inflammatory marker CD40, and the cardiac myofilament
protein troponin. Coronary atherosclerosis is the common cause of heart failure
(HF). Disordered calcium signalling to the myofilaments occurs in HF and in
cardiomyopathy. Enhanced calcium signalling suppresses HF. Neuro-humoral and
biomechanical processes, as seen in hypertension, produce cardiac hypertrophy,
which predisposes to HF through apoptosis. Although in humans cardiac damage
produces permanent loss of cells, because the heart cannot regenerate,
developments in stem cell technology suggest that help is at hand.

PMID: 15172670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004 Jul;24(7):1259-65. Epub 2004 May 20.

Balance between PGD synthase and PGE synthase is a major determinant of
atherosclerotic plaque instability in humans.

Cipollone F(1), Fazia M, Iezzi A, Ciabattoni G, Pini B, Cuccurullo C, Ucchino S, 
Spigonardo F, De Luca M, Prontera C, Chiarelli F, Cuccurullo F, Mezzetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Prevention Center, University of Chieti G D'Annunzio, School
of Medicine, Chieti, Italy. fcipollone@unich.it

Retraction in
    Cipollone F. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):e1.

OBJECTIVE: Inducible cyclooxygenase (COX-2) catalyzes the first step in
prostanoid biosynthesis and is considered a proinflammatory enzyme. COX-2 and
type 1 inducible PGE synthase (mPGES-1) have a role in metalloproteinase (MMP)
release leading to plaque rupture. In contrast, lipocalin-type PGD synthase
(L-PGDS) has been shown to exert antiinflammatory actions. Thus, in this study we
investigated whether a shift from a PGDS-oriented to a PGES-oriented profile in
arachidonate metabolism leads to inflammatory activation in rupture-prone plaque 
macrophages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Atherosclerotic plaques were obtained from 60 patients who
underwent carotid endarterectomy, symptomatic (n=30) and asymptomatic (n=30)
according to evidence of recent transient ischemic attack or stroke. Plaques were
analyzed for COX-2, mPGES-1, L-PGDS, PPARgamma, IkappaBalpha, NF-kappaB, and
MMP-9 by immunocytochemistry, Western blot, reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction, enzyme immunoassay, and zymography. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
pathway was significantly prevalent in symptomatic plaques, whereas PGD2 pathway 
was overexpressed in asymptomatic ones, associated with NF-kappaB inactivation
and MMP-9 suppression. In vitro COX-2 inhibition in monocytes was associated with
reduced MMP-9 release only when PGD2 pathway overcame PGE2 pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that COX-2 may have proinflammatory and
antiinflammatory properties as a function of expression of downstream PGH2
isomerases, and that the switch from L-PGDS to mPGES-1 in plaque macrophages is
associated with cerebral ischemic syndromes, possibly through MMP-induced plaque 
rupture.

PMID: 15155382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2004 May;6(3):243-50.

Inflammatory and oxidative markers in atherosclerosis: relationship to outcome.

Shishehbor MH(1), Hazen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid 
Avenue, C51, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Inflammation and oxidative processes are key components of atherosclerosis, from 
fatty streak formation to plaque rupture and thrombosis. Recent basic and
clinical studies have identified a number of inflammatory and oxidative processes
that appear to play a direct role in atherothrombosis and identify potentially
clinically useful markers of inflammation and oxidative stress. In this review,
we highlight recent results on several of the more promising markers of
inflammation for cardiovascular disease risk assessments, such as C-reactive
protein, myeloperoxidase, and soluble CD40 ligand and nitrotyrosine, as well as
other potential markers.

PMID: 15068750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Med Sci (Paris). 2004 Mar;20(3):298-303.

[Apoptosis and acute coronary syndromes].

[Article in French]

Mallat Z(1), Tedgui A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U.541, Hôpital Lariboisière, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease of the arterial wall. Ischemic
manifestations of atherosclerosis are mainly due to thrombus formation upon a
superficially eroded (denudation of luminal endothelium, 40% of cases) or deeply 
ruptured (fibrous cap rupture, 60% of cases) plaques. Recent studies have
unraveled potentially critical roles for both inflammatory and apoptotic
processes in plaque destabilization leading to thrombus formation.
Pro-inflammatory mediators have been particularly implicated in the loss of
smooth muscle cell and the promotion of collagen degradation that are responsible
for fibrous cap rupture, whereas apoptosis has been identified as one of the
major determinants of plaque thrombogenicity.

PMID: 15067574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Med Hypotheses. 2004;62(4):499-506.

C-reactive protein is not only an inflammatory marker but also a direct cause of 
cardiovascular diseases.

Li JJ(1), Fang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Remin Hospital, Wuhan University School of Medicine, Wuhan 430060, PR China.
lijnjn@yahoo.com.cn

Inflammatory processes play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
and mediate many of the stages of atheroma development from initial leukocyte
recruitment to eventual rupture of the unstable atherosclerotic plaque.
C-reactive protein (CRP), an acute phase reactant that reflects different degree 
of inflammation, has been indicated an independent risk factor in a variety of
cardiovascular disease (CVD), especially in unstable coronary syndrome. Our data 
have showed that increased level of CRP in patients with unstable angina was
associated with short-term clinical outcomes, response for conventional therapy, 
and activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), but it is not correlated to
coronary artery stenosis as well as lipid profile. Traditionally, CRP has been
thought of as a bystander marker of vascular inflammation, without playing a
direct role in the CVD. More recently, accumulating evidence suggest that CRP may
have direct proinflammatory effects, which is associated with all stages of
atherosclerosis. In our recent study, the results demonstrate that monocytes
exhibit an enhanced production of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in response to CRP, and
this response is significantly inhibited by simvastatin in a dose-dependent
manner. This may be of important interest in the connection between CVD and CRP. 
Based on those evidence, we hypothesis that CRP is not only an inflammatory
marker but also a direct cause of CVD, and treatments that reduce CRP should be
benefit for primary and secondary prevention of CVD. Administration of several
agents, especially statin has been showed to modify CRP concentrations with a
concurrent fall in cardiovascular events. Our clinical investigation suggested
that treatment with a single high-dose or a short-term common dose of simvastatin
could rapidly reduce CRP level. Those data indicated that the benefit to the
vascular endothelium might occur quickly in patients with CVD, which is critical 
issue for high-risk subgroup. Other interventions, such as lifestyle changes,
weight loss, and stop smoking are also warrant attention.

PMID: 15050096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


507. J Immunol. 2004 Apr 1;172(7):4535-44.

Adenoviral gene delivery of elafin and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor
attenuates NF-kappa B-dependent inflammatory responses of human endothelial cells
and macrophages to atherogenic stimuli.

Henriksen PA(1), Hitt M, Xing Z, Wang J, Haslett C, Riemersma RA, Webb DJ,
Kotelevtsev YV, Sallenave JM.

Author information: 
(1)Rayne Laboratory, Medical Research Council Centre for Inflammation Research,
Medical School, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting arterial vessels.
Strategies to reduce the inflammatory responses of endothelial cells and
macrophages may slow lesion development and prevent complications such as plaque 
rupture. The human protease human neutrophil elastase (HNE), oxidized low density
lipoprotein, LPS, and TNF-alpha were chosen as model stimuli of arterial wall
inflammation and led to production of the chemokine IL-8 in endothelial cells. To
counteract the activity of HNE, we have examined the effects of adenoviral gene
delivery of the anti-elastases elafin, previously demonstrated within human
atheroma, and murine secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI), a related
molecule, on the inflammatory responses of human endothelial cells and
macrophages to atherogenic stimuli. We developed a technique of precomplexing
adenovirus with cationic lipid to augment adenoviral infection efficiency in
endothelial cells and to facilitate infection in macrophages. Elafin
overexpression protected endothelial cells from HNE-induced IL-8 production and
cytotoxicity. Elafin and murine SLPI also reduced endothelial IL-8 release in
response to oxidized low density lipoprotein, LPS, and TNF-alpha and macrophage
TNF-alpha production in response to LPS. This effect was associated with reduced 
activation of the inflammatory transcription factor NF-kappaB, through
up-regulation of IkappaBalpha, in both cell types. Our work suggests a novel and 
extended anti-inflammatory role for these HNE inhibitors working as effectors of 
innate immunity to protect tissues against maladaptive inflammatory responses.
Our findings indicate that elafin and SLPI may be gene therapy targets for the
treatment of atheroma.

PMID: 15034071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2004 Mar;6(2):131-9.

Inflammation and atherosclerosis.

Shishehbor MH(1), Bhatt DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500
Euclid Avenue, Desk F25, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Inflammation plays a pivotal role in all stages of atherogenesis, from foam cell 
to plaque formation to rupture and ultimately to thrombosis. Insight gained from 
recent basic and clinical data linking inflammation to atherosclerosis has
yielded important diagnostic and prognostic information. Low-grade chronic
inflammation as measured by high sensitivity C-reactive protein predicts future
risk of acute coronary syndrome independent of traditional cardiovascular risk
factors. In addition, individuals with higher "inflammatory burden" gain the
largest absolute risk reduction with aggressive risk-lowering therapy. The link
between inflammation and atherosclerosis provides a new venue for future
pharmacologic agents that may slow the progression of atherosclerosis by
inhibiting inflammation.

PMID: 15023298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Herz. 2004 Feb;29(1):4-11.

[Atherosclerosis and arteriitis: implications for therapy of cardiovascular
disease].

[Article in German]

Galle J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik der Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
J-C.Galle@MAIL.UNI-WUERZBURG.DE

Cardiovascular disease, the most common cause of death in the Western world,
results mainly from atherosclerotic remodeling of the arterial system.
Atherosclerosis defines a disease in which the arterial wall becomes thickened
and loses elasticity. This is clearly not a static condition. Instead,
atherogenesis reflects a continuous development over time, ranging from
macroscopically intact arteries to ruptured sclerotic plaques. Different stages
at different sites can be present simultaneously within one individual. The
pathophysiology of atherogenesis comprises various important steps, including
enhanced endothelial permeability, expression of adhesion molecules, monocyte
adhesion and immigration, foam cell formation, fatty streaks, smooth muscle cell 
migration and plaque formation, and, finally, plaque rupture and thrombus
formation. In recent years, atherosclerosis is more and more being recognized as 
a chronic inflammatory process. The hypothesis of a chronic inflammation in
atherosclerosis is supported by the following findings: atherosclerosis is
associated with enhanced serum levels of inflammation parameters, including in
particular C-reactive protein (CRP, Table 1); the atherosclerotic artery produces
different hydrolytic enzymes, adhesion molecules, cytokines, and growth factors
as seen in chronic inflammation; cells found in early atherosclerotic lesions are
typically inflammatory cells (monocytes/ macrophages and T-lymphocytes); and,
there is convincing clinical and experimental evidence that formation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) is augmented during this chronic inflammatory process due to
an imbalance between synthesis of ROS and neutralizing antioxidative defense
mechanisms. Studies in the general population could clearly show that markers of 
inflammation, in particular CRP, predict the cardiovascular risk. It is the aim
of this review to discuss the role of inflammatory processes for the development 
of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. Pro-inflammatory substances
contributing to oxidative stress are listed in Table 2, and particular emphasis
is placed on pathophysiologic effects induced by oxidized LDL and angiotensin II.
Figure 1 summarizes important reaction steps of oxidative stress reactions, based
on formation of superoxide anion (O(2)(-)). Finally, therapeutic options are
presented, although it has to be emphasized that treatment with antibiotics
proved to be essentially ineffective, and treatment options with antioxidants are
not sufficiently evaluated to allow a final statement. Meanwhile, however, there 
is accumulating evidence that established treatment regimens with statins or
renin-angiotensin system inhibitors possess profound anti-inflammatory and
antioxidative properties which may support their beneficial effects on
cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 14968336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


510. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2004 Feb 4;3:1.

Vasa vasorum in plaque angiogenesis, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes
mellitus, and atheroscleropathy: a malignant transformation.

Hayden MR(1), Tyagi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Missouri Columbia, 
PO BOX 1140 Lk. Rd. 5-87, Camdenton, Missouri 65020, USA. mrh29@usmo.com

BACKGROUND: Vascularization is an exciting and complex mechanism involving
angiogenesis and arteriogenesis. The metabolic syndrome (MS) and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) are associated with multiple metabolic toxicities, which result
in reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to an elevated tension of oxidative-redox
stress and an accelerated atherosclerosis termed atheroscleropathy.
RESULTS: This atheroscleropathy is associated with accelerated angiogenesis
within the vulnerable, thin-cap fibro-atheroma, prone to rupture resulting in
acute coronary syndromes (ACS). The resulting intimopathy with its
neovascularization due to angiogenesis of the adventitial vasa vasorum (Vv) is
prone to intraplaque hemorrhage (IPH). These IPH are associated with
destabilization of the vulnerable plaques resulting in plaque erosion and plaque 
rupture resulting in ACS. In atheroscleropathy the adventitial Vv invades the
plaque in a malignant-like fashion and concurrently is associated with chronic
inflammation, as macrophages are being deposited within the shoulder regions of
these vulnerable plaques. These angiogenic Vv provide a custom delivery vascular 
network for multiple detrimental substrates, which further accelerates the growth
of these vulnerable plaques and atheroscleropathy. There exists a vascularization
paradox in MS and T2DM, in that, angiogenesis within the plaque is induced and
arteriogenesis is impaired.
CONCLUSION: This review will attempt to provide a database of knowledge regarding
the vascularization process (angiogenesis and arteriogenesis) and its mechanisms 
to better understand the increased cardiovascular risk and the increased
morbidity and mortality associated with MS and T2DM.

PMCID: PMC356925
PMID: 14761253  [PubMed]


511. Am J Med. 2003 Dec 8;115 Suppl 8A:99S-106S.

Endothelial function, inflammation, and prognosis in cardiovascular disease.

Gonzalez MA(1), Selwyn AP.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

The vascular endothelium is an active, dynamic tissue that controls many
important functions, including regulation of vascular tone and maintenance of
blood circulation, fluidity, coagulation, and inflammatory responses.
Cardiovascular risk factors affect many of the normal functions of the
endothelium. In particular, oxidized low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
initiates a series of events that begin with cell activation, endothelial
dysfunction, local inflammation, and a procoagulant vascular surface. These
conspire to result in plaque formation and ultimately plaque rupture and
cardiovascular events. Endothelial dysfunction may be evaluated by means of
invasive techniques, such as coronary artery reactivity to acetylcholine, or
noninvasive techniques, such as brachial artery ultrasonography. Loss of
endothelium-dependent vasodilation is a characteristic feature throughout the
development of atherosclerosis, and it is independently related to future adverse
cardiovascular risk. Therefore, measurement of endothelial function can possibly 
be used to determine risk, to triage management, and to improve outcomes. At the 
same time, inflammation is a crucial factor in the atherosclerotic disease
process. To identify and monitor the ongoing inflammatory process, markers of
inflammation such as C-reactive protein (CRP) have been studied. Scientific
evidence shows that elevated plasma CRP values add to the predictive ability of
other established risk factors; moreover, elevated values appear to augment the
Framingham Coronary Risk Score in identifying individuals who should be
considered for cardioprotective treatment programs. Interestingly,
thiazolidinediones (TZDs), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
agonists that are effective in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, not
only increase insulin sensitivity but can benefit endothelial function because
they exhibit anti-inflammatory effects. For many individuals, including those
with the metabolic syndrome and/or type 2 diabetes, endothelial dysfunction and
elevated plasma CRP levels indicate increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
Notably, the TZDs have been shown to reduce CRP levels and may improve
endothelial function.

PMID: 14678874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Mediators Inflamm. 2003 Dec;12(6):361-5.

Levels of serum IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-8 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in patients 
with unstable angina pectoris.

Ozeren A(1), Aydin M, Tokac M, Demircan N, Unalacak M, Gurel A, Yazici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Karaelmas University, 67600
Kozlu, Zonguldak, Turkey. ozerenali@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Inflammation is the most important mechanism of plaque disruption
playing an essential role in acute coronary syndromes. It is controversial
whether the inflammatory mediators are the cause or the result in the development
of plaque rupture. Stimulation of interleukins increases adhesion molecules,
fibrinogen and plasminogen activator inhibitors,which cause the activation of
inflammation and thrombosis. However, the importance of interleukins in acute
coronary syndromes has not been clearly defined. We did not find any article
concerning relations between the levels of serum interleukin(IL)-1beta, IL-2, IL 
-8 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha in patients with unstable angina
pectoris (UAP). So the aim of this study was to determine the levels of serum I
-1b, IL-2, IL-8 and TNF-alpha during the early stage of UAP.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty-seven patients with UAP(12 females and 25 males; mean
age, 57.5 +/- 9.7 years) within 6 h of admission and 20 healthy volunteers(eight 
females and 12 males; mean age, 51.3 +/- 6.3 years) were included in the study.
IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-8 and TNF-alpha levels were measured using the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay method. Patients with acute or chronic inflammation, renal
failure or chronic heart failure were excluded from the study. The age, gender
and risk factors of the study and control groups were similar. The levels of
IL-1beta, IL-8 and TNF-alpha were significantly increased (p < /0.0001, p <
/0.001 and p < /0.016, respectively) in patients with UAP. There was no
difference of IL-2 levels between the UAP group and controls.
CONCLUSION: We detected high levels of IL-1beta, IL-8 and TNF-alpha in patients
with UAP during early phase. We suggest that proinflammatory cytokines (e.g.
IL-1beta,IL-8, TNF-alpha) may play an important role in the development of
atherosclerosis and its complications.

PMCID: PMC1781634
PMID: 14668096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Nephrologie. 2003;24(7):411-4.

[Inflammation and atherosclerosis].

[Article in French]

Tedgui A(1), Mallat Z.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U541, Biologie et pathologie moléculaire du vaisseau, Hôpital
Lariboisière, Paris. alain.tedgui@larib.inserm.fr

Atherosclerosis is a vascular pathology in which inflammation plays a major role 
at every stage of the disease. The inflammatory process develops in response to
abnormal cholesterol deposits in the intima of large arteries. The inflammatory
reaction is initiated by a phase of endothelial activation induced by cytokines, 
oxidized low density lipoprotein (LDL) and/or changes in endothelial shear
stress. This leads to the primary expression of endothelial adhesion molecules
and chemokines followed by the recruitment and activation of circulating
monocytes and lymphocytes. The clinical manifestations of atherosclerosis,
including acute coronary syndromes, are the consequences of atherosclerotic
plaque rupture/erosion that triggers thrombus formation leading to the occlusion 
of the vessel lumen. The local inflammatory process at the level of the
atherosclerotic plaque might influence the stability of the plaque through its
potential effects on the extracellular matrix, and on the plaque thrombogenicity.
In humans, systemic inflammation has been recognized as a major risk factor of
occurrence of acute coronary syndromes.

PMID: 14650755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


514. J Investig Med. 2003 Sep;51(5):295-300.

Serum metalloproteinase 9 levels in patients with coronary artery disease: a
novel marker of inflammation.

Ferroni P(1), Basili S, Martini F, Cardarello CM, Ceci F, Di Franco M, Bertazzoni
G, Gazzaniga PP, Alessandri C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University of Rome La
Sapienza, Rome, Italy. patrizia.ferroni@uniroma1.it

BACKGROUND: The finding that expression of metalloproteinases (MMPs) is induced
in atherosclerotic plaques prone to rupture suggests the possibility that
patients with atherosclerotic diseases would show enhanced blood levels of MMPs
and that MMPs might represent a potential inflammatory risk factor for
atherosclerosis. Therefore, the present study was aimed at verifying whether MMPs
may represent sensitive markers of inflammation in patients with coronary artery 
disease.
METHODS: MMP-2, MMP-9, interleukin (IL)-6, C-reactive protein (CRP), and
fibrinogen levels were measured in blood samples obtained from 66 cases with
previous acute myocardial infarction and 66 control subjects similar for age,
sex, and major atherosclerotic risk factors but without history or evidence of
atherothrombotic diseases.
RESULTS: Biohumoral markers of inflammation and MMP-9 levels were significantly
elevated in cases compared with controls (median values 40.6 versus 9.8 ng/mL; p 
< .0001), whereas MMP-2 levels did not differ between the two groups (median
values 839 versus 873 ng/mL; p = .53). A direct correlation was found among
MMP-9, CRP, IL-6, and fibrinogen levels. Conditional logistic regression analysis
showed that MMP-9 is related to myocardial infarction (p = .006) even after
adjusting for cardiovascular medications and CRP.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that measurement of serum MMP-9 levels may
represent a novel marker of inflammation in patients with known coronary artery
disease and might provide an index of plaque activity in this clinical setting.

PMID: 14577520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


515. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2003 Sep;2(3):257-65.

Inflammatory cytokines and cardiovascular disease.

Ito T(1), Ikeda U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
titou@fd5.so-net.ne.jp

The designation of atherosclerosis as a chronic inflammatory process represents
an interesting paradigmatic shift for cardiologists. The plasma concentrations of
interleukin-6 and its hepatic byproduct, C-reactive protein, may reflect the
intensity of occult plaque inflammation and the vulnerability to rupture.
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and interleukin-8 play a crucial role in
initiating atherosclerosis by recruiting monocytes/macrophages to the vessel
wall, which promotes atherosclerotic lesions and plaque vulnerability. In
addition, circulating levels of these proinflammatory cytokines increase in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina, but not in those
with stable angina. Also, the plasma concentrations of these cytokines increase
after percutaneous coronary intervention, causing late restenosis after the
procedure. Angiotensin II and other atherogenic factors induce these cytokines in
the cardiovascular tissues through the activation of transcription factors, such 
as nuclear factor-kappaB or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors.
Conversely, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) can potently inhibit these
proinflammatory factors in the vessels. A small GTP-binding protein, Rho, may be 
a key molecule to explain the anti-inflammatory effects of statins.
Interleukin-10 also exerts anti-inflammatory effects on the cardiovascular
tissues, possibly by deactivating proinflammatory cytokines and inducible nitric 
oxide synthase. Gene therapy using interleukin-10 may be a promising means for
untreatable or complicated cases of cardiovascular diseases. Thus, therapeutic
modulations of these inflammatory cytokines may be useful in the prevention of
atherosclerosis and future cardiovascular events.

PMID: 14561160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Autoimmun Rev. 2003 Oct;2(6):332-8.

Atherosclerosis: anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities of statins.

Kwak BR(1), Mulhaupt F, Mach F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University Hospital, Foundation for Medical Research, 
Faculty of Medicine, 64 Avenue de la Roseraie, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
brenda.kwakchanson@medicine.unige.ch

Large clinical trials have demonstrated that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors or
'statins' greatly reduce cardiovascular-related morbidity and mortality. The
beneficial effects of statins were first assumed to result from their ability to 
reduce cholesterol synthesis and improve serum lipid profiles. In recent years,
however, numerous pleiotropic effects of statins on atherosclerotic lesions have 
been described. In this review, we summarize the actions of statins on different 
aspects of atherosclerotic plaque development. These include endothelial
dysfunction, leukocyte recruitment and inflammation, smooth muscle cell
activation/proliferation, and finally plaque rupture and thrombosis.

PMID: 14550874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2003 Oct;14(5):469-75.

Apoptotic cell death in atherosclerosis.

Littlewood TD(1), Bennett MR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Centre for
Clinical Investigation, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
tdl2@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Apoptosis is a critical regulator of homeostasis in many
tissues, including the vasculature. Apoptosis in atherosclerotic lesions is
triggered by inflammatory processes, both via cell-cell contact and by cytokines 
and oxidized lipids. Apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells
and macrophages may promote plaque growth and pro-coagulation and may induce
rupture, the major consequence of atherosclerosis in humans.
RECENT FINDINGS: Studies over the past year have clearly demonstrated the
significance of cell death in atherosclerosis. Some of the key cellular, cytokine
and molecular regulators that contribute to the apoptosis of cells within the
atherosclerotic lesion have been identified and their mechanism of action
elucidated. Other studies have shed some light on the identity of cells whose
loss by apoptosis contributes to plaque instability.
SUMMARY: The identification of which cell types undergo apoptosis within the
atherosclerotic lesion, the extracellular factors that impinge on these cells,
and the intracellular mechanisms that govern their demise have begun to be
elucidated. This information is critical in the design of further in-vivo
experiments such as the exploitation of animal models, and ultimately, in
applying this knowledge to clinical practice.

PMID: 14501585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


518. J Endocrinol. 2003 Sep;178(3):373-80.

Testosterone as a protective factor against atherosclerosis--immunomodulation and
influence upon plaque development and stability.

Malkin CJ(1), Pugh PJ, Jones RD, Jones TH, Channer KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield S10 2JF, UK.

Inflammation plays a central pathogenic role in the initiation and progression of
coronary atheroma and its clinical consequences. Cytokines are the mediators of
cellular inflammation and promote local inflammation in the arterial wall, which 
may lead to vascular smooth muscle apoptosis, degradation of the fibrin cap and
plaque rupture. Platelet adhesion and thrombus formation then occur, resulting
clinically in unstable angina or myocardial infarction. Recent studies have
suggested that cytokines are pathogenic, contributing directly to the disease
process. 'Anti-cytokine' therapy may, therefore, be of benefit in preventing or
slowing the progression of cardiovascular disease. Both oestrogens and
testosterone have been shown to have immune-modulating effects; testosterone in
particular appears to suppress activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Men with
low testosterone levels are at increased risk of coronary artery disease. An
anti-inflammatory effect of normal physiological levels of sex hormones may,
therefore, be important in atheroprotection. In this Article, we discuss some of 
the mechanisms involved in atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and the
putative link between testosterone deficiency and atheroma formation. We present 
the hypothesis that the immune-modulating properties of testosterone may be
important in inhibiting atheroma formation and progression to acute coronary
syndrome.

PMID: 12967330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Heart. 2003 Sep;89(9):993-7.

Inflammatory and thrombotic mechanisms in coronary atherosclerosis.

Tousoulis D(1), Davies G, Stefanadis C, Toutouzas P, Ambrose JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.
drtousoulis@hotmail.com

Many molecular and cellular mechanisms link inflammation and haemostatic
mechanisms. Inflammation, and perhaps chronic infection, may play important roles
in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic lesions are
heavily infiltrated by cellular components associated with inflammation
(macrophages and T lymphocytes), and acute plaque rupture is also associated with
inflammatory components. Several markers of systemic inflammation may predict
future cardiovascular events in apparently healthy subjects as well as in
patients with chronic and acute syndromes. There may thus be therapeutic
potential in modifying the atherosclerotic, vasomotor, and thrombotic components 
of ischaemic heart disease.

PMCID: PMC1767836
PMID: 12923007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Atherosclerosis. 2003 Aug;169(2):203-14.

Circulating markers of inflammation and atherosclerosis.

Lind L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University Hospital, S-751 85, Uppsala,
Sweden. lars.lind@medsci.uu.se

Atherosclerosis is nowadays generally accepted as an inflammatory disease. It is 
known that local inflammation occurs in the formation the plaques, as macrophages
and other immuno-competent cells are present in the lesions from an early stage, 
and it is also known that inflammation plays an important role in the weakening
of the fibrous cap of the advanced plaque, eventually leading to plaque rupture
and acute coronary syndromes. The present review focuses on two questions. First,
if circulating markers of inflammation could differentiate between healthy
subjects and those with atherosclerotic manifestations. Second, if those markers 
could differentiate between those with a stable atherosclerotic disease, such as 
stable angina pectoris, and those prone to unstable manifestations of
atherosclerosis, such as acute coronary syndromes. Using data from both
cross-sectional and prospective studies it could be shown that the majority of
the studies which had investigated the role of markers for systemic inflammation,
such as CRP, leukocyte count, serum fibrinogen and different cytokines, found
elevated levels in patients with atherosclerosis and especially so in those with 
an unstable coronary disease. The same pattern was found when inflammatory
markers with a vascular origin, such as the adhesion molecules, were
investigated. Thus, based on the literature it is obvious that circulating
markers of inflammation have a role as risk factors for unstable manifestations
of atherosclerosis, but it is still unclear whether the different inflammatory
markers merely are markers, or if they in an active way contribute to the
development and progression of the atherosclerotic disease in their own.

PMID: 12921971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Circulation. 2003 Sep 2;108(9):1070-7. Epub 2003 Aug 11.

The receptor RAGE as a progression factor amplifying arachidonate-dependent
inflammatory and proteolytic response in human atherosclerotic plaques: role of
glycemic control.

Cipollone F(1), Iezzi A, Fazia M, Zucchelli M, Pini B, Cuccurullo C, De Cesare D,
De Blasis G, Muraro R, Bei R, Chiarelli F, Schmidt AM, Cuccurullo F, Mezzetti A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chieti G D'Annunzio School of Medicine , Chieti, Italy.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2003 Sep 2;108(9):e9016-7.

BACKGROUND: RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products [AGEs]) plays a
role in diabetic atherosclerosis. Recently, we have demonstrated enhanced
expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and PGE synthase-1 (COX-2/mPGES-1) in human
symptomatic plaques, and provided evidence that it is associated with
metalloproteinase (MMP)-induced plaque rupture. However, the specific
transmembrane signaling pathway(s) influencing plaque COX-2/mPGES-1 expression is
unknown. The aim of this study was to characterize RAGE expression in human
plaques and to correlate it with the inflammatory infiltration, COX-2/mPGES-1 and
MMP expression, and with clinical evidence of diabetes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plaques obtained from 60 patients undergoing carotid
endarterectomy were divided into diabetic and nondiabetic according to clinical
evidence of type 2 diabetes. Plaques were subjected to analysis of RAGE,
NF-kappaB, COX-2/mPGES-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9, lipid and oxidized LDL (oxLDL)
content, and collagen content by immunohistochemistry and Western blot, whereas
zymography was used to detect MMP activity. Immunohistochemistry was used to
identify CD68+ macrophages, CD3+ T-lymphocytes, smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and
HLA-DR+ inflammatory cells. Diabetic plaques had more (P<0.0001) macrophages,
T-lymphocytes, and HLA-DR+ cells, more (P<0.0001) immunoreactivity for RAGE,
activated NF-kappaB, COX-2/mPGES-1, and MMPs, increased (P<0.0001) gelatinolytic 
activity, reduced (P<0.0001) collagen content, and increased (P<0.0001) lipid and
oxLDL content. Interestingly, RAGE, COX-2/mPGES-1, and MMP expression was
linearly correlated with plasma level of HbA1c.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study demonstrates in humans that RAGE
overexpression is associated with enhanced inflammatory reaction and
COX-2/mPGES-1 expression in diabetic plaque macrophages, and this effect may
contribute to plaque destabilization by inducing culprit metalloproteinase
expression.

PMID: 12912808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2003 Jul;81(1):12-22, 1-11. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Coinfection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae in ruptured
plaques associated with acute myocardial infarction.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Higuchi Mde L(1), Reis MM, Sambiase NV, Palomino SA, Castelli JB, Gutierrez PS,
Aiello VD, Ramires JA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas, FMUSP, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
amplourdes@incor.usp.br

OBJECTIVE: To study atheromas, Mycoplasma pneumoniae (M. pneumoniae), and
Chlamydia pneumoniae (C. pneumoniae).
METHODS: C. pneumoniae was studied with immunohistochemistry and M. pneumoniae
with in situ hybridization (ISH), in segments of coronary arteries (SCA) as
follows: group A - thrombosed ruptured plaques (TRP) of 23 patients who died due 
to acute myocardial infarction (AMI); group B - 23 nonruptured plaques (NRP) of
group A patients; group C - NRP of 11 coronary patients who did not die due to
AMI; and group D - 11 SCA from patients with dilated cardiomyopathy or Chagas'
disease without atherosclerosis.
RESULTS: The mean number of C. pneumoniae+ cells/400x in groups A, B, C, and D
was, respectively, 3.3 +/- 3.6; 1.0 +/- 1.3; 1.2 +/- 2.4; and 0.4 +/- 0.3; and
the percentage of M. pneumoniae area was, respectively, 3.9 +/- 3.5; 1.5 +/- 1.6;
0.9 +/- 0.9; and 0.4 +/- 0.2. More M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae were found in 
of group A than in group B (P<0.01). Good correlation was seen between the area
of the vessel and the M. pneumoniae area in the plaque (r = 0.46; P=0.001) and
between C. pneumoniae+ cells and CD4+ T lymphocytes (r = 0.42; P<0.01). The
number of C. pneumoniae+ cells correlated with CD20+ B cells (r=0.48; P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae are more frequently found in TRP
correlate with the intensity of the inflammation and diameter of the vessel
(positive remodeling).

PMID: 12908069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


523. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Apr;1(4):829-35.

Identification of differentially expressed genes in coronary atherosclerotic
plaques from patients with stable or unstable angina by cDNA array analysis.

Randi AM(1), Biguzzi E, Falciani F, Merlini P, Blakemore S, Bramucci E,
Lucreziotti S, Lennon M, Faioni EM, Ardissino D, Mannucci PM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Medicine, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, UK. a.randi@ic.ac.uk

The composition of atherosclerotic plaques is a crucial factor in determining
rupture, thrombosis and clinical events. In this study, we analyzed gene
expression in coronary plaques from patients with stable or unstable angina using
gene arrays. Total RNA was extracted from eight plaques collected by therapeutic 
directional coronary atherectomy. cDNA probes, generated by amplification, were
hybridized to nylon arrays containing 482 genes. Here we report the results for
the inflammation, adhesion and hemostasis subsets. Many genes not previously
associated with atherosclerosis, such as the lymphocyte adhesion molecule MadCAM,
were expressed in the plaques. anova analysis showed higher tissue factor (TF)
expression in unstable angina samples. Five genes were expressed at lower levels 
in unstable angina samples: anticoagulant protein S, cyclooxygenase (COX)-1,
interleukin (IL)-7 and chemokines monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 and -2.
Gene arrays provide a new approach to study plaque composition and identify
candidate markers of plaque instability.

PMID: 12871422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Drug News Perspect. 2001 Mar;14(2):101-9.

Role of inflammation in atherothrombosis.

Chyu KY(1), Shah PK.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Division of Cardiology, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Acute coronary syndromes result from thrombosis on a disrupted atherosclerotic
plaque. Plaques prone to rupture contain cellular elements and their secreted
products that are characteristic of active inflammation. Multiple triggers may be
involved in the activation of inflammatory response. Therapeutic strategies
toward these triggers have been proposed and tested. Here the authors review the 
evidence for the involvement of inflammation in atherothrombosis and possible
therapies for the triggers of inflammation.

(c) 2001 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

PMID: 12819801  [PubMed]


525. J Interv Cardiol. 2003 Jun;16(3):231-42.

Detecting vulnerable plaque using peripheral blood: inflammatory and cellular
markers.

Schwartz RS(1), Bayes-Genis A, Lesser JR, Sangiorgi M, Henry TD, Conover CA.

Author information: 
(1)Minnesota Cardiovascular Research Institute, Minneapolis Heart Institute
Foundation, Minneapolis, MN 55407, USA. rss@rsschwartz.com

The concept of the vulnerable patient has arrived. Enhanced diagnostic methods
will eventually permit accurately finding and treating these patients and their
disease. Clinical Cardiologists now recognize that coronary atherosclerosis is
two pathophysiologically distinct syndromes: stable and unstable. Stable coronary
syndromes result from fixed, severe stenoses limiting blood flow and causing
secondary myocardial ischemia. The unstable acute coronary syndromes are
frequently catastrophic and are pathophysiologically distinct. They result from
different cell subsets causing vascular inflammatory syndromes rather than
gradual lumen constriction by plaque. Though pathophysiologically distinct, they 
may show common pathophysiology when a ruptured plaque heals and progressively
becomes a critical stenosis. For the present hs-CRP measurement is the strongest 
correlative factor for future clinical events due to arterial inflammation:
myocardial infarction, unstable angina, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease
in both diseased and apparently healthy, asymptomatic patients. The CRP plasma
level also is the best risk assessment in patients with either stable or unstable
angina, long term after myocardial infarction, and in patients undergoing
revascularization therapies. One study showed the only independent cardiovascular
risk indicators using multivariate, age adjusted and traditional risk analysis
were CRP and Total/HDL cholesterol ratio. If CRP, IL-6, and ICAM-1 levels are
added to lipid levels, risk assessment can be improved over lipids alone. The
prevalence of high-risk subjects in the general population is low, amplifying
diagnostic problems for vulnerable plaque. Since no test yet has high sensitivity
or specificity, diagnostic errors are high, with many false positives and
negatives. Sensitivity or specificity must be increased by developing a risk
marker panel, or by simultaneously finding other markers that themselves are
highly sensitive and specific for vulnerable plaque.

PMID: 12800402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Geriatrics. 2003 May;58(5):19-22, 25.

C-reactive protein. Should it be considered a coronary risk factor?

Aronow WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cardiology and Geriatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute phase reactant which is not associated with 
coronary atherosclerosis in many studies. However, it has been demonstrated in
many, but not all, studies to predict cardiovascular events. Increased CRP levels
may reflect tissue damage and inflammation not only in the arteries, but anywhere
in the body. Elevated CRP levels may be induced by metabolic, infective,
immunologic, or other processes. Increased CRP levels are probably an indirect
marker of any increased cytokine response to inflammatory stimuli that are
critical for atherosclerotic plaque progression and rupture. A large-scale
prospective trial is needed to investigate whether reduction of elevated CRP will
reduce cardiovascular events.

PMID: 12756677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


527. Rev Prat. 2003 Mar 15;53(6):602-6.

[Acute coronary thrombosis].

[Article in French]

Tedgui A(1), Mallat Z.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 541 Hôpital Lariboisière 75475 Paris. ziad.mallat@larib.inserm.fr

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease of the arterial wall. Ischaemic
manifestations of atherosclerosis are mainly due to thrombus formation upon a
superficially eroded (denudation of luminal endothelium, 40% of cases) or deeply 
ruptured (fibrous cap rupture, 60% of cases) plaques. Recent studies have
unraveled potentially critical roles for both inflammatory and apoptotic
processes in plaque unstability leading to thrombus formation. Pro-inflammatory
mediators have been particularly implicated in the loss of smooth muscle cells
and the promotion of collagen degradation that are responsible for fibrous cap
rupture, whereas apoptosis has been identified as one of the major determinants
of plaque thrombogenicity.

PMID: 12749144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Hamostaseologie. 2003 May;23(2):61-6.

[The unstable carotid stenosis: definition and biological processes].

[Article in German]

Sitzer M(1), Trostdorf F.

Author information: 
(1)Neurologische Klinik, Zentrum der Neurologie und Neurochirurgie, Johann
Wolfgang Goethe-Universität Frankfurt am Main, Schleusenweg 2-16, 60528 Frankfurt
am Main. sitzer@em.uni-frankfurt.de

The occurrence of cerebral or retinal ischemic symptoms ipsilateral to high-grade
internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis indicates a status of instability with a
substantial risk for future major stroke. Additionally, the detection of
microembolic signals downstream of ICA stenosis is predictive for future cerebral
ischemia in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients. There is substantial evidence 
that in unstable ICA stenosis plaque rupture and thrombus formation are the most 
frequent pathoanatomic findings. In contrast, in nearly the half of unstable
carotid plaques the lumen surface appears to be intact. Within plaque tissue, the
unstable plaque is mainly characterized by a substantial amount of inflammatory
cell (i. e. macrophages, T-cells) infiltration. These cells are mainly localized 
in the fibrous cap near the necrotic core. Produced by macrophages, matrix
degrading enzymes (e. g. MMP-9) are overexpressed in the unstable ICA stenosis.
Thrombogenicity is mainly determined by the local concentration of activated
tissue factor, also expressed by inflammatory cells. Furthermore, a significantly
higher rate of apoptotic smooth muscle cells can be found within the fibrous cap 
of instable carotid stenoses. Whether infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae
contribute to instability is unlikely, because a positive association to clinical
instability has not been shown up to now. The exact and detailed characterization
of the unstable ICA plaque and the correlation of different biological mechanisms
to clinical instability may offer the possibility to use it as a human model of
unstable atherosclerosis in general and to test the efficacy of new developed
anti-atherosclerotic pharmaceutical agents.

PMID: 12736700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Clin Cardiol. 2003 Apr;26(4 Suppl 3):III39-44.

Connecting the role of C-reactive protein and statins in cardiovascular disease.

Ridker PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. pridker@partners.org

The observation that almost half of all myocardial infarctions and strokes occur 
in persons without elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol has
prompted the study of factors other than hyperlipidemia that contribute to the
development of atherosclerosis. A growing body of evidence indicates that
inflammation plays a substantial role in plaque progression and rupture. Research
interest has increasingly focused on biomarkers of inflammation as a means of
predicting more accurately which patients are at high risk for cardiovascular
disease (CVD). Clinical studies indicate that C-reactive protein (CRP), a marker 
of systemic inflammation, independently predicts cardiovascular risk in healthy
persons as well as in persons with established CVD and those with acute ischemia.
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors, or statins, have been
shown to reduce levels of CRP through mechanisms independent of their effects on 
lipid levels. Initial clinical studies also suggest that CRP levels may have
utility in the targeting of statin therapy, particularly in primary prevention.
These results need direct testing in large, prospective clinical trials to
determine whether statin therapy will benefit persons without overt
hyperlipidemia but with evidence of systemic inflammation. Confirmation of these 
preliminary findings, if incorporated into evidence-based guidelines, may
profoundly change the approach to diagnosis and treatment of CVD.

PMID: 12708638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Circulation. 2003 Apr 22;107(15):1966-71. Epub 2003 Apr 7.

Absence of association between infectious agents and endothelial function in
healthy young men.

Khairy P(1), Rinfret S, Tardif JC, Marchand R, Shapiro S, Brophy J, Dupuis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Montreal Heart Institute, University of Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2003 Dec 23;108(25):E171-2; author reply E171-2.

BACKGROUND: Although several studies have reported correlations between
infections and coronary artery disease, associations with endothelial
dysfunction, its precursor, have not been established. This study assessed
whether infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae (CP), cytomegalovirus (CMV),
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), or Helicobacter pylori (HP) is associated with
decreased endothelial function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixty-five male subjects, aged 20 to 45 years, with no risk 
factors or known coronary artery disease were enrolled in a seroepidemiological
cross-sectional study. Endothelial function was determined by flow-mediated
brachial vasodilation. Serum antibodies consisting of anti-CP IgG and IgM,
anti-CMV IgG, anti-EBV nuclear antigen, and anti-HP IgG and markers of
inflammation including high-sensitivity C-reactive protein were measured. Average
age was 29.3+/-5.5 years. Seroprevalence values were 65.1%, 34.9%, 88.9%, and
14.3% for CP, CMV, EBV, and HP, respectively. Average values for
endothelium-dependent and -independent vasodilation were 9.4+/-4.5% and
12.6+/-5.0%. Despite adequate statistical power (82% for the primary end point), 
no association between endothelial function and seropositivity to individual
infectious agents, infectious burden, or C-reactive protein was observed in
regression analyses controlling for variables including age, blood pressure, and 
lipid parameters. Moreover, no dose-response trends between serum titers and
endothelial function were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Lack of association between chronic infection with CP, CMV, EBV, HP,
or pathogen burden and endothelial function was observed, suggesting that these
agents are not implicated as early etiologic triggers in the genesis of coronary 
artery disease. These results do not preclude active involvement at later stages 
of the pathophysiological process, such as acceleration of existing
atherosclerosis and acute plaque rupture.

PMID: 12681997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


531. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Feb 19;41(4 Suppl S):103S-112S.

Pathobiology, not angiography, should guide management in acute coronary
syndrome/non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: the
non-interventionist's perspective.

Nissen SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. Nissens@ccf.org

Although an early invasive strategy (angiography and percutaneous coronary
intervention) is the convention in acute coronary syndrome (ACS)/non-ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction (MI) in the U.S., a conservative pharmacologic
approach is common in other countries. Trial evidence has demonstrated a modest
benefit with an angiographically guided approach; but patients having negative
troponin values or who were receiving aspirin showed little or no benefit, and
those without ST-segment changes had slightly worse outcomes. Limitations of
angiography are clinically important. Identification of hemodynamically
significant stenoses may be confounded by coronary remodeling. Also, most
plaques, particularly those responsible for acute events, are extraluminal.
Assessment of the luminal diameter of a lesion, which requires comparison with a 
normal reference segment, may be impossible because of the diffuse nature of the 
disease. Percutaneous coronary intervention after plaque rupture may itself cause
embolization and no-reflow phenomena, leading to severe complications. In
addition, most ruptures may be clinically silent. Evidence of a systemic
inflammatory component suggests that ACS patients are at risk for plaque rupture 
at multiple sites. The inability of angiography to depict the true extent of
atherosclerosis is supported by necropsy and transplant donor studies. A
metabolic approach to this systemic disease is the only strategy designed to
influence the behavior of both the small number of angiographically visible
lesions and the large number of occult plaques. Statins and other agents decrease
the incidence of death and MI by stabilizing atherosclerotic plaques throughout
the coronary bed, reducing inflammation, collagen degradation, tissue factor
expression, and vasomotor tone.

PMID: 12644348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


532. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Feb 19;41(4 Suppl S):15S-22S.

Mechanisms of plaque vulnerability and rupture.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Burns and Allen
Research Institute and Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center and
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. shahp@cshs.org

Rupture of atherosclerotic plaque has been identified as the proximate event in
the majority of cases of acute ischemic syndromes. Plaque rupture exposes
thrombogenic components of the plaque, activating the clotting cascade and
promoting thrombus formation. Future culprit lesions are difficult to identify,
however, and angiographic assessment of stenosis severity is prone to
underestimation. Compared with plaques that cause severe luminal stenosis,
vulnerable plaques may cause relatively minor stenosis, although they account for
more cases of rupture and thrombosis. Such unstable, vulnerable plaques may be
associated with outward remodeling of the vessel. Because severely stenotic
plaques are more likely to stimulate collateral circulation to the post-stenotic 
segment, plaque rupture and thrombosis at such sites may be clinically silent.
Characteristic histomorphologic features of vulnerable plaques include a high
lipid content, increased numbers of inflammatory cells, and extensive adventitial
and intimal neovascularity. The fibrous cap of an atherosclerotic plaque may
become thin and rupture as a result of the depletion of matrix components through
the activation of enzymes, such as matrix-degrading proteinases and cystine and
aspartate proteases, and through the reduction in the number of smooth muscle
cells. Activated T cells may also inhibit matrix synthesis through the production
of interferon-gamma. A number of triggers of plaque rupture have been identified.
Also, some thrombi may occur without rupture of the fibrous cap. Reducing the
lipid component and inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques may help reduce the
risk of plaque rupture. This may account for the clinical benefit of risk-factor 
reduction gained from changes in lifestyle and from drug therapy.

PMID: 12644336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Hypertension. 2003 Mar;41(3 Pt 2):834-41. Epub 2002 Dec 30.

Molecular mechanisms mediating inflammation in vascular disease: special
reference to monocyte chemoattractant protein-1.

Egashira K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
egashira@cardiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

There are several clinical challenges for the treatment of intractable
cardiovascular diseases, including restenosis, atherosclerotic complications
resulting from plaque rupture, severe tissue ischemia, and heart failure.
Emerging evidence suggests that an inflammatory process is involved in the
pathogenesis of such intractable diseases. In particular, inflammatory responses 
to arterial injury, which cause continuous recruitment and activation of
monocytes mainly through activation of the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP-1) pathway, have a central role in restenosis and atherogenesis. We recently
devised a new strategy for anti-MCP-1 therapy by transfecting an N-terminal
deletion mutant of the MCP-1 gene into skeletal muscles. This mutant MCP-1 lacks 
the N-terminal amino acids 2 to 8, called 7ND, and works as a dominant-negative
inhibitor of MCP-1. We demonstrated that 7ND gene transfer suppresses monocyte
infiltration/activation after arterial injury and markedly inhibits experimental 
restenosis in animals after balloon injury or stent placement. Furthermore, 7ND
gene transfer not only attenuated the development of early atherosclerotic
lesions but also limited progression of preexisting atherosclerotic lesions and
changed the lesion composition into a more stable phenotype in
hypercholesterolemic mice. Vascular inflammation mediated by MCP-1 might create a
positive feedback loop to enhance restenotic and atherosclerotic changes through 
activating lesional monocytes. Therefore, vascular inflammation mediated by MCP-1
has a central role in the development of experimental restenosis,
atherosclerosis, and plaque destabilization, leading to acute coronary syndrome. 
This strategy for gene therapy might be useful against human restenosis, thereby 
opening a new therapeutic window for antirestenosis and antiatherosclerosis
paradigms.

PMID: 12624005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 2002 Dec;95(12):1210-4.

[The vulnerable plaque: a necessary concept in the management of
atherothrombosis].

[Article in French]

Rioufol G(1), Finet G.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'hémodynamique, hôpital cardiovasculaire et pneumologique
Louis-Pradel, hospices civils, BP Lyon Montchat, 69394 Lyon.
gilles.rioufol@univ-lyon1.fr

The advance of cardiology has improved the prognosis of atherothrombosis through 
direct diagnosis and early management, but the global incidence of
atherothrombotic events has been modified only slightly. Currently, although the 
stenosing effect of atherosclerosis is well known and if treated hardly poses a
problem, the unpredictable risk of arterial thrombosis continues to cause the
seriousness of the disease in as much as it is not linked to the degree of
stenosis. The initiation of thrombosis progresses via destabilisation phenomena
of atherosclerotic plaques with rupture or erosion of the capsule. The
identification of plaques "at risk" of instability, so-called "vulnerable"
plaques, is thus now a fundamental concept. Thanks to anatomo-pathology, certain 
morphological and functional criteria of these vulnerable plaques are better
understood and are starting to find a clinical resonance. An inflammatory
syndrome scenario, thin capsule, and a large lipidic heart associated with an as 
yet quiescent atherosclerotic plaque are predictive elements of acute coronary
syndrome. These elements show promise and an already combined biological and
morphological approach will certainly be at the heart of clinical research for
years to come.

PMID: 12611042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


535. Blood Purif. 2003;21(1):29-36.

Inflammation and atherosclerosis in end-stage renal disease.

Zoccali C(1), Mallamaci F, Tripepi G.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) - IBM, Laboratorio CNR di
Epidemiologia Clinica e Fisiopatologia delle Malattie Renali e dell'Ipertensione 
Arteriosa, Ospedali Riuniti, Reggio Calabria, Italia. carmine.zoccali@tin.it

Atherosclerosis is a multifaceted process which may be initiated by various
insults to vascular endothelium. Independently of the nature of the offending
factor, the endothelial dysfunction that results from the initial insult is
characterized by increased adhesiveness of the endothelium to leukocytes and
platelets and by the synthesis of vasoactive molecules, cytokines and
procoagulant factors. This defensive response is characterized by classical
inflammatory changes and may lead to plaque formation, luminal obstruction and
plaque rupture. Factors involved in arterial damage in end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) span from classical risk factors to disease-peculiar factors (anemia,
secondary hyperparathyroidism and exposure to bioincompatible dialysis membranes 
and/or contaminated dialysis fluid) and to emerging and novel risk factors such
as hyperhomocysteinemia, infections and accumulation of the endogenous inhibitor 
of NO synthase, asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA). There is strong and
consistent evidence that acute phase reactants like C-reactive protein and
cytokines like IL-beta, TNF-alpha and IL-6 are independently associated with
death and atherosclerosis in ESRD patients. The experimental and epidemiological 
data collected thus far coherently show that endothelial dysfunction resulting
from inflammation may promote abnormal vascular behavior and thrombosis in ESRD. 
There are several possible therapeutic approaches for reducing the risk excess
associated with inflammation in ESRD. These possibilities range from drugs
interfering with the angiotensin system or with adrenergic activity to
anti-inflammatory and antilipid agents to vitamins, antioxidants, to the amino
acid precursor of nitric oxide, L-arginine, and perhaps to antibiotics. The
intellectual framework is well delineated but very few controlled trials have
been performed or are underway in patients with ESRD.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12566658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


536. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2003 Jan 4;147(1):15-20.

[Atherosclerosis and inflammation: the role of C-reactive protein].

[Article in Dutch]

Ablij HC(1), Meinders AE.

Author information: 
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Algemene Interne Geneeskunde, Postbus
9600, 2300 RC Leiden.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute phase protein, the serum concentration of
which can increase up to a 1000-fold after the onset of a stimulus. It plays a
role in the aspecific immune response to bacteria and fungi and the clearance of 
apoptotic cell material. Inflammation plays an important role in the aetiology
and pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and plaque formation. Approximately fifty
percent of acute coronary syndromes are the consequence of unstable plaques
rupturing, followed by thrombus formation. A characteristic of these unstable
plaques is an increase in inflammatory cells (macrophages and T lymphocytes). The
serum concentration of CRP might reflect the amount of inflammation within
atherosclerotic plaques and thus might provide an indirect measurement of the
instability of the plaques. CRP could therefore have a predictive value for the
occurrence of plaque rupture. Furthermore, there are indications that CRP itself 
is active in the inflammatory process. Prospective studies have shown that
so-called high-sensitivity CRP (hsCRP) measurements could be used as a tool for
determining the risk for acute coronary syndromes. The inflammation-inhibiting
characteristics of statins and acetylsalicylic acid (especially the reduction of 
the hsCRP level) might contribute to reducing the risk of plaque rupture.

PMID: 12564292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


537. Jpn Heart J. 2002 Nov;43(6):607-19.

C-reactive protein and coronary artery disease.

Auer J(1), Berent R, Lassnig E, Eber B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II/Cardiology and Intensive Care, General
Hospital Wels, Grieslirchnerstrasse 42, A-4600 Wels, Austria.

Evidence suggests that inflammation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis. The chronic inflammatory process can develop to an acute
clinical event by the induction of plaque rupture and therefore cause acute
coronary syndromes. The aim of this study was to determine the serum levels of
the circulating acute-phase reactant C-reactive protein (CRP), which is a
sensitive indicator of inflammation, in patients with chronic stable coronary
artery disease (CAD) and acute coronary syndromes (ACS). We studied 56 subjects: 
1) 25 consecutive patients (18 men, 7 women; mean age, 68.5 +/- 14.3 years,
range, 40-86) with unstable angina (UA) or acute myocardial infarction (AMI); 2) 
31 consecutive patients (25 men, 6 women; mean age 64 +/- 12.7; range, 47-83,
years) with signs and symptoms of clinically stable CAD.
High-sensitivity-C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels were determined with a
commercially available enzyme-linked immunoassay method. In patients with
unstable angina and AMI before reperfusion therapy, CRP levels were not
significantly different to those in patients with stable CAD (5.96 +/- 2.26
versus 4.35 +/- 2.6 mg/L; P = 0.12), but tended to be higher in patients with
unstable angina and AMI. Baseline CRP levels in the subgroup of patients with AMI
(6.49 +/- 2.28 mg/L) were significantly higher than levels in patients with
stable CAD (4.35 +/- 2.6 mg/L; P = 0.02). CRP levels in patients with unstable
angina and AMI were measured four times during a 72-hour period (0, 12, 24, and
72 hours). The lowest value was observed at baseline and differed significantly
from values measured at any other time of the observation period (P < 0.001; 5.96
+/- 2.26; 9.5 +/- 9.04, 18.25 +/- 11.02; 20.25 +/- 10.61). CRP levels after 12,
24, and 72 hours were also significantly different to the initial values for
patients with stable CAD (P < 0.01). There was no correlation between CRP and
creatine kinase (CK), CK-MB isoenzyme, or troponin I positivity as markers for
the extent of the myocardial injury during the observation period. Baseline
levels of serum CRP tended to be higher in patients with unstable angina or AMI
but were not significantly different from levels in patients with chronic stable 
CAD. In the subgroup of patients with AMI, baseline CRP levels were significantly
higher than the levels in patients with stable CAD. CRP as a marker of
inflammation is significantly increased in patients with AMI and unstable angina 
shortly after the onset of symptoms (after a period of 12 hours), supporting the 
hypothesis of an activation of inflammatory mechanisms in patients with an acute 
coronary syndrome or AMI.

PMID: 12558125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris). 1999 Nov;48(9-10):611-23.

[Physiopathology of acute coronary syndromes].

[Article in French]

Quilici J(1), Gallo R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Cardiologie de Montéal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Coronary atherosclerosis and its thrombotic complications represent one of the
leading causes of lesions usually consists of successive acute episodes, either
silent or in the form of an acute coronary syndrome such as unstable angina,
non-Q-wave myocardial infarctions, transmural myocardial infarctions or sudden
death. This mode of progression does not exclude phases of regression, or more
frequently stabilization of plaques, which, depending on their haemodynamic
repercussions, are then responsible for chronic myocardial ischaemia. Acute
coronary syndrome (ACS) correspond to the same pathophysiological process:
rupture of an atheromatous plaque initiating harmful thrombotic, inflammatory and
vasomotor phenomena. This is not a new concept, but progress over recent years
suggests that the composition and biology of the plaque are factors involved more
in the initiation of ACS than the size of the plaque. "Soft" lesions, rich in
lipids, are clearly not only the most unstable lesions, but also the most
thrombogenic because of their large tissue factor content. After describing the
structure of vulnerable plaques, the authors discuss the causes of their rupture 
and the resulting cascade or events, responsible for life-threatening clinical
situations.

PMID: 12555467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2003 Jan;56(1):9-15.

[Role of anti-inflammatory drugs in the treatment of acute coronary syndromes.
From athero-inflammation to athero-thrombosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Altman R, Scazziota A.

Coronary thrombosis is the most important cause of morbidity and mortality and
the most severe manifestation of atherosclerosis. Knowledge of the
pathophysiology of atheroma formation and the causes of atheroma accidents have
allowed the development of new therapeutic measures for reducing thrombotic
events after a coronary episode. Treating the thrombosis after plaque rupture is 
useful, but a late measure once coronary flow is disturbed. Therefore, treatment 
at an earlier stage, which we call athero-inflammation, a central event in
atheroma progression leading to atherothrombosis, seems wise. There is evidence
of an inflammatory component in the pathogenesis of atheroma rupture in acute
coronary events. Earlier studies of anti-inflammatory medication have not
demonstrated a reduction in thrombotic complications after an acute coronary
episode. However, there are pathophysiological arguments and clinical findings
that suggest that it would be advisable to include anti-inflammatory medications,
especially those that inhibit preferentially COX-2, in the therapeutic arsenal
for this pathology. We postulated that blocking athero-inflammation could prevent
thrombosis. A pilot study was carried out in 120 patients with acute coronary
syndrome without ST-segment elevation in which 60 patients were treated with
meloxicam, a preferential COX-2 inhibitor. All patients received heparin and
aspirin. During the stay in the coronary care unit, as well as after 90 days,
meloxicam lowered composite outcomes (myocardial infarction, death and
revascularization procedures) compared with the control group. These results and 
available pathophysiological and clinical evidence support the hypothesis of
potential benefits of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with preferential
inhibitory activity on COX-2 in patients with acute coronary syndromes. More
trials are needed to confirm their preventive effect.

PMID: 12549993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2002;11 Suppl 7:S443-7.

Vitamin E in cardiovascular disease: has the die been cast?

Yusoff K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Cheras, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. dkfper@mail.hukm.ukm.my

Cardiovascular disease, in particular coronary artery disease (CAD), remains the 
most important cause of morbidity and mortality in developed countries and, in
the near future, more so in the developing world. Atherosclerotic plaque
formation is the underlying basis for CAD. Growth of the plaque leads to coronary
stenosis, causing a progressive decrease in blood flow that results in angina
pectoris. Acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina were recently
recognised as related to plaque rupture, not progressive coronary stenosis. Acute
thrombus formation causes an abrupt coronary occlusion. The characteristics of
the fibrin cap, contents of the plaque, rheological factors and active
inflammation within the plaque contribute to plaque rupture. Oxidative processes 
are important in plaque formation. Oxidized low density lipoproteins (LDL) but
not unoxidized LDL is engulfed by resident intimal macrophages, transforming them
into foam cells which develop into fatty streaks, the precursors of the
atherosclerotic plaque. Inflammation is important both in plaque formation and
rupture. Animal studies have shown that antioxidants reduce plaque formation and 
lead to plaque stabilisation. In humans, high intakes of antioxidants are
associated with lower incidence of CAD, despite high serum cholesterol levels.
This observation suggests a role for inflammation in CAD and that reducing
inflammation using antioxidants may ameliorate these processes. Men and women
with high intakes of vitamin E were found to have less CAD. Vitamin E
supplementation was associated with a significant reduction in myocardial
infarction and cardiovascular events in the incidence of recurrent myocardial
infarction. In the hierarchy of evidence in evidence-based medicine, data from
large placebo-controlled clinical trials is considered necessary. Results from
various mega-trials have not shown benefits (nor adverse effects) conferred by
vitamin E supplementation, suggesting that vitamin E has no role in the treatment
of CAD. These results do not seem to confirm, at the clinical level, the effect
of antioxidants against active inflammation during plaque rupture. However, a
closer examination of these studies showed a number of limitations, rendering
them inconclusive in addressing the role of vitamin E in CAD prevention and
treatment. Further studies that specifically address the issue of vitamin E in
the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and in the treatment of CAD need be
performed. These studies should use the more potent antioxidant property of
alpha-tocotrienol vitamin E.

PMID: 12492632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


541. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2002 Nov;17(6):626-32.

Vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque: emerging challenge for animal models.

Rekhter M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Pharmacology, Pfizer Global Research and
Development, 2800 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.
mark.rekhter@pfizer.com

A recent shift in the clinical paradigm of acute coronary syndromes led to a
burst of activity in developing animal models related to plaque vulnerability. In
the present review, animal models of spontaneous and induced plaque rupture,
thrombosis, and hemorrhage and "vulnerability endpoints" in conventional models
of atherosclerosis are discussed. These endpoints include readouts related to
biomechanical properties of the plaques, collagen turnover, underlying
inflammation, and lipid accumulation. Challenges in model validation are
emphasized. Development of new animal models and new tools of monitoring plaque
vulnerability will facilitate design of plaque-stabilizing therapies.

PMID: 12466705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


542. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Nov 21;90(10C):40L-48L.

Endothelial function. From vascular biology to clinical applications.

Behrendt D(1), Ganz P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. dbehrendt@partners.org

The endothelium, by releasing nitric oxide (NO), promotes vasodilation and
inhibits inflammation, thrombosis, and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation.
These biological actions of NO make it an important component in the endogenous
defense against atherosclerosis and its overt clinical complications. Loss of the
functional integrity of the endothelium, as seen commonly in the milieu of
cardiovascular risk factors, plays an integral role in all stages of
atherosclerosis from lesion initiation to plaque rupture. A number of established
techniques can assess endothelial function in human vascular beds. The outcome of
endothelial testing has profound prognostic implications and is an independent
predictor of atherosclerosis disease progression and cardiovascular event rates. 
The large clinical benefit of statins and angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors in patients with atherosclerosis involves favorable effects of
endothelial function. Studies of endothelial function represent a prime example
of a successful application of insights derived from vascular biology at the
bedside.

PMID: 12459427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002 Nov;32(11):803-10.

Inflammatory imbalance between IL-10 and TNFalpha in unstable angina potential
plaque stabilizing effects of IL-10.

Waehre T(1), Halvorsen B, Damås JK, Yndestad A, Brosstad F, Gullestad L, Kjekshus
J, Frøland SS, Aukrust P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
torgun.wahre@klinmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and acute coronary syndromes
involves inflammation and immunological mechanisms. We hypothesized that patients
with unstable angina may have an imbalance between inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory cytokines.
DESIGN: Plasma levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)alpha and interleukin
(IL)-10 were analyzed in 44 patients with stable angina, 29 patients with
unstable angina and 20 controls. mRNA levels of these cytokines were analyzed in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). We also studied the in vitro effects
of IL-10 in PBMC from unstable angina patients.
RESULTS: Our main findings were: (1) the angina patients and particularly those
with unstable disease had significantly raised TNFalpha in comparison with the
controls, both at the protein and mRNA level; (2) in contrast, the levels of
IL-10 were not different in the angina patients in comparison with the healthy
controls, resulting in a markedly enhanced TNFalpha:IL-10 ratio, particularly in 
the unstable angina patients; (3) while exogenously added IL-10 markedly
inhibited the release of TNFalpha, IL-8 and tissue factor as well as impairing
the gelatinolytic activity and mRNA production of matrix metalloproteinase-9, it 
enhanced the tissue inhibitor of this metalloproteinase (i.e. TIMP-1) in PBMC
from the unstable angina patients.
CONCLUSION: Patients with unstable angina appear to have an imbalance between
TNFalpha and IL-10, possibly favouring inflammatory net effects. IL-10 may have
beneficial effects on mechanisms that are important in plaque rupture and
thrombus formation.

PMID: 12423320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002 Oct;32(10):759-66.

Procoagulant and inflammatory response of virus-infected monocytes.

Bouwman JJ(1), Visseren FL, Bosch MC, Bouter KP, Diepersloot RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diakonessen Hospital Utrecht, University Medical Center Utrecht, Bosch Medi
Center, 's Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands. jbouwman@diakhuis.nl

BACKGROUND: Monocytes play a prominent role in inflammation, coagulation and
atherosclerosis by their ability to produce tissue factor (TF) and cytokines. The
aim of the present study was to establish whether virus-infected monocytes
initiate coagulation. In addition, the production of cytokines by monocytes may
accelerate the chronic process of atherosclerosis and may contribute to coronary 
syndromes by eliciting plaque instability.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Monocytes were isolated by Vacutainer(R), BD Biosciences, 
Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands and subsequent magnetic cell sorting (MACS(R),
Milteny Biotec, Bergish Gladbach, Germany). Coagulation times in normal pooled
plasma and Factor VII-deficient plasma were measured after infection with
cytomegalovirus (CMV), Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cp) and influenza A\H1N1. Anti-TF
antibodies were added to neutralize TF expressed on monocytes. Interleukins (IL) 
6, 8 and 10 were measured in the supernatants.
RESULTS: Chlamydia pneumoniae- and CMV-infected monocytes decreased the clotting 
time by 60%, and influenza-infected monocytes by 19%, as compared to uninfected
monocytes. Procoagulant activity was absent when Factor VII-deficient plasma or
anti-TF antibodies were used. Monocytes produced both IL-6 and IL-8 after
infection with CMV (317 pg mL-1 and 250 pg mL-1) or Cp (733 pg mL-1 and 268 pg
mL-1). Similar results were obtained for influenza virus-infected monocytes, but 
the levels of both cytokines were 3-5-fold higher (1797 pg mL-1 and 725 pg mL-1).
Interleukin-10 was not produced by infected monocytes.
CONCLUSION: The procoagulant activity of virus-infected monocytes is
TF-dependent. Although influenza infection did not generate a significant
reduction in clotting time, the pronounced expression of IL-6 and IL-8 may induce
local and/or systemic inflammatory reactions, which may be associated with plaque
rupture and atherosclerosis. The lack of production of the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 may even accelerate these processes.

PMID: 12406025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


545. J Cardiovasc Risk. 2002 Oct;9(5):247-54.

Imaging of atherosclerosis. Intravascular imaging of the vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaque: spotlight on temperature measurement.

Verheye S(1), Diamantopoulos L, Serruys PW, Van Langenhove G.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Translational Research Institute and the Department of
Interventional Cardiology, Middelheim Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
stefan.verheye@pandora.be

The vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque is associated with an increased number of
acute coronary syndromes. Current techniques such as coronary angiography are
unable to detect and prospectively evaluate these lesions. Recently, other
techniques, both invasive and noninvasive, are being developed trying to detect
the plaque that is at increased risk for rupture eventually resulting in
increased thrombosis. This review describes briefly evolving techniques for
imaging of vulnerable plaques and describes in detail intravascular thermography.

Copyright 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 12394317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


546. J Cardiovasc Risk. 2002 Oct;9(5):229-35.

Imaging of atherosclerosis. Remodelling of coronary arteries.

Pasterkamp G(1), Smits PC.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiology Laboratory, Heart Lung Institute, University Medical
Center, ICIN, Utrecht. g.pasterkamp@hli.azu.nl

Next to plaque formation, arterial geometric remodelling is an important
determinant of luminal narrowing in atherosclerotic disease. Expansive
remodelling retards, whereas constrictive remodelling accelerates lumen loss by
plaque formation. Expansive arterial remodelling is a double edged sword,
however. While luminal area is preserved, the plaque beneath the surface of the
lumen often reveals large atheroma with heavy inflammation in expansive
remodelling. These characteristics have been associated with plaque rupture and
subsequent myocardial infarction. Thus, in the long term expansive remodelling
may lead to thrombosis of angiographically silent lesions while constrictive
remodelling is often associated with stable coronary syndromes. The mechanisms of
arterial remodelling are poorly understood. This is mainly due to lack of good in
vitro and animal models which makes mechanistic studies difficult.

Copyright 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 12394315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Eur J Intern Med. 2002 Oct;13(7):412.

C-reactive protein: history and revival.

Ablij H(1), Meinders A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center
C1-R, P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands

C-reactive protein (CRP) is the prototype acute-phase protein, which can increase
up to 1000-fold after the onset of a stimulus. Aside from its disputed role as a 
marker of infection and/or inflammation in daily clinical practice, the protein
has a wide variety of biological properties and functions. Due to its opsonizing 
abilities and its capability to activate human complement, CRP plays an important
role in the innate host defense against different microorganisms, such as
bacteria and fungi. The same opsonophagocyting properties can lead to clearance
of host cell material, including nuclear constituents. Inflammation is one of the
cornerstones in the etiology and pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, which led to
worldwide attention being focused on CRP and its role in the process of
atherosclerosis. This role may have a dual character. First, CRP levels reflect
the 'burden' of inflammation within atherosclerotic lesions, thus reflecting the 
grade of vulnerability and instability of the plaques. For this reason, an
increased level of the protein may be a prelude to rupture of the plaque and,
thus, to occlusive arterial disease. Secondly, CRP may play an active role in the
atherosclerotic process. CRP plays a role in the expression of different adhesion
molecules on endothelial cells and the protein is able to activate human
complement within the plaque. Furthermore, the recent discovery of local
production of CRP and complement proteins within the plaque suggests an active
role for the protein in the inflammatory cascade. Whatever the role for CRP in
the atherosclerotic process, it has been proven that an elevated CRP level, with 
a cut-off point of approximately 3 mg/l, is associated with an increased risk of 
occlusive arterial disease, especially acute coronary syndromes.

PMID: 12384129  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


548. Thromb Haemost. 2002 Oct;88(4):554-67.

Cytokines in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

Young JL(1), Libby P, Schönbeck U.

Author information: 
(1)Leducq Center for Cardiovascular Research, Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC 309a,
Boston, MA, USA.

Research during the last two decades established atheromatous lesions as active
sites of inflammation and immune responses, contrasting to the traditional view
of atherosclerosis as an acellular lesion composed of lipid deposits. In
particular, cytokines appear to orchestrate the chronic development of
atherosclerosis, eventually leading to the formation of complex atherosclerotic
plaques, which can trigger acute thromboembolic complications, such as myocardial
infarction or stroke. Indeed the rupture-prone plaque, characterized by a thin
fibrous cap overlaying a voluminous lipid core, exhibits accumulation of various 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines may control the clinical consequences
of plaques by mediating infiltration and accumulation of immunocompetent cells,
directing the turnover of fibrillar collagens (governing the fragility of the
fibrous cap), or enhancing foam cell formation and thrombogenicity of the lipid
core, among other processes outlined in this review. Thus, understanding the role
of cytokines in the pathophysiology of the atherosclerotic plaque might provide a
promising therapeutic avenue for this prevalent human disease. This review will
focus on members of the interleukin, tumor necrosis factor, and interferon
families of cytokines in modulating key processes of atherogenesis.

PMID: 12362224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


549. Am J Crit Care. 2002 Sep;11(5):482-6.

High-sensitivity C-reactive protein is the most effective prognostic measurement 
of acute coronary events.

Futterman LG(1), Lemberg L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami School of Medicine, Fla 33101,
USA.

Inflammation plays a major role in the pathogenesis of arterial atherosclerosis. 
The stages of atheroma development from early recruitment of leukocytes and fatty
streaks to the unstable plaque and finally rupture are mediated by the
inflammatory process. Several markers of vascular wall inflammation that can
predict future risk of plaque rupture have been identified. However, these lack
the specificity of CRP. Numerous large-scale prospective studies established
hs-CRP as a strong biochemical marker for the prediction of future first or
recurrent coronary events. A Food and Drug Administration-approved method for
measuring hs-CRP is currently available.

PMID: 12233975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


550. J Mal Vasc. 2002 Jun;27(3):143-56.

[Fibrinogen: factor and marker of cardiovascular risk].

[Article in French]

Drouet L(1), Bal Dit Sollier C.

Author information: 
(1)Angio-hématologie, Hôpital Lariboisière, 2, rue Ambroise Paré, 75010 Paris,
France. ludovic.drouet@lrb.ap-hop-paris.fr

Most cardiovascular events result from a thrombotic complication in patients with
atherosclerosis. Inflammation plays a central role both in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis and in the development of complications (particularly plaque
rupture). Fibrinogen is both a marker of inflammation and a major determinant of 
thrombosis and hemorrheology. Clinical data corroborate with epidemiological data
showing that higher serum fibrinogen level (compared with matched controls) is
predictive of both the risk of primary cardiovascular events in the general
population and the risk of secondary events among patients. Fibrinogen level,
determined by both environmental and genetic factors, is a good example of
gene-environment interaction. The rise in fibrinogen level indicative of
significantly increased risk is actually very small, lying within the normal
range. This explains why epidemiological data cannot be used to establish
cardiovascular risk for individual patients in routine practice (excepting very
high elevations rarely encountered). To date, fibrinogen is the only compound
formally recognized as both a risk factor and a marker of cardiovascular risk.
Other compounds, including CRP, von Willebrand factor, and more recently the
CD40-CD40 ligand system, have also been shown to play a double role as predictors
and markers. These new developments shed new light on fibrinogen as a risk
marker/factor for atherothrombotic ischemic events.

PMID: 12232531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2002;17 Suppl 8:10-5.

Cardiac effects of chronic inflammation in dialysis patients.

Santoro A(1), Mancini E.

Author information: 
(1)Malpighi Nephrology and Dialysis Division, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi,
Bologna, Italy.

Cardiovascular pathology is the major cause of death in uraemia. There is
evidence that a chronic inflammation with activation of C-reactive protein,
interleukin-6, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and other cytokines is associated
with vascular pathology, both in the general population and in dialysis patients.
The cardiovascular system, and particularly the vascular wall, is the main target
of the inflammatory process. Inflammation of the coronary arteries could be
involved in the development of atherosclerosis and its related clinical
syndromes. In the uraemic state, an increased production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines may trigger the onset and progression of atherosclerosis and favour the
subsequent complications, such as plaque fissuration and rupture. However,
inflammatory cytokines also have a depressant action on the myocardium, thus
inducing myocardial dysfunction. Together, these conditions may ultimately
enhance the risk of myocardial infarction and death. From this standpoint,
cardiovascular disease should also be investigated with the traditional
biochemical inflammation markers and the evaluation of the circulating cytokine
level, although new reliable markers could provide further diagnostic help. New
therapeutic approaches should also be considered.

PMID: 12147771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2002 Apr;3(4):569-77.

Angiotensin II as a pro-inflammatory mediator.

Phillips MI(1), Kagiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville 32610, USA. MIP@ufl.edu

Angiotensin II (Ang II), the most important component of the renin-angiotensin
system, is usually associated with hypertension and renal failure. Through its
pro-inflammatory actions, it also plays an important role in each step of the
development of atherosclerotic plaques and plaque rupture. Ang II stimulates the 
expression of nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB), a transcription factor which
regulates gene expression of inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) 
and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). Ang II type 1 receptors (AT1) and
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) are dramatically increased in atherosclerotic
plaques, particularly in monocytes at the fibrous cap. Thus, in multiple ways,
Ang II is a critical factor in atherosclerotic plaque formation, inflammation and
plaque stability. ACE inhibitors and AT1R inhibitors could therefore be
appropriate therapeutic agents in the treatment of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12090726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Cleve Clin J Med. 2002;69 Suppl 2:SII28-32.

Pathogenic mechanisms in giant cell arteritis.

Weyand CM(1), Goronzy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Medical and Graduate Schools, Rochester, MN, USA.
weyand.cornelia@mayo.edu

T lymphocytes, encountering stimulatory signals in the adventitia of medium-size 
arteries, emerge as the key players in inflammation-associated injury pathways.
In GCA, all injury mechanisms have been related to effector macrophages.
Regulated by IFN-gamma-producing T cells, macrophages commit to distinct avenues 
of differentiation and acquire a spectrum of potentially harmful capabilities
(Figure 1). Macrophages in the adventitia focus on production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines. Macrophages in the media specialize in oxidative damage with lipid
peroxidation attacking smooth muscle cells and matrix components. These
macrophages also supply reactive oxygen intermediates that, in combination with
nitrogen intermediates, cause protein nitration of endothelial cells. Production 
of oxygen radicals is complemented by the production of metalloproteinases,
likely essential in the breakdown of elastic membranes. With the fragmentation of
the internal elastic lamina, the intimal layer becomes accessible to migratory
myofibroblasts that, driven by PDGF, form a hyperplastic intimal layer and cause 
occlusion of the vessel lumen. Expansion of the hyperplastic intima is
accompanied by intense neoangiogenesis, supported by angiogenesis factors that
again derive from specialized macrophages. Similarities in injury pathways
between GCA and another arterial disease, atherosclerosis, are beginning to be
recognized. Specifically, activated T cells and macrophages are increasingly
appreciated as key players in the process of instability and rupture of
atherosclerotic plaque. A specialized subset of CD4 T cells, CD4+ CD28- T cells, 
are suspected to participate in tissue injury in the plaque. These T cells are
equipped with cytolytic capabilities and release large amounts of IFN-gamma.
Comparative studies between patients with GCA and those with acute coronary
syndromes should enhance our ability to define the principles of arterial wall
inflammation, the specifics of injury in that microenvironment, and help in the
identification of the eliciting signals.

PMID: 12086261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


554. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Jun 1;22(6):975-82.

Transforming growth factor-beta mediates balance between inflammation and
fibrosis during plaque progression.

Lutgens E(1), Gijbels M, Smook M, Heeringa P, Gotwals P, Koteliansky VE, Daemen
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht,
University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The transition from stable to rupture-prone and ruptured atherosclerotic plaques 
involves many processes, including an altered balance between inflammation and
fibrosis. An important mediator of both is transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta,
and a pivotal role for TGF-beta in atherogenesis has been postulated. Here, we
determine the in vivo effects of TGF-beta inhibition on plaque progression and
phenotype in atherosclerosis. Recombinant soluble TGF-beta receptor II
(TGFbetaRII:Fc), which inhibits TGF-beta signaling, was injected in
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice for 12 weeks (50 microg, twice a week
intraperitoneally) as early treatment (treatment age 5 to 17 weeks) and delayed
treatment (age 17 to 29 weeks). In the early treatment group, inhibition of
TGF-beta signaling treatment resulted in a prominent increase in CD3- and
CD45-positive cells in atherosclerotic lesions. Most profound effects were found 
in the delayed treatment group. Plaque area decreased 37.5% after TGFbetaRII:Fc
treatment. Moreover, plaque morphology changed into an inflammatory phenotype
that was low in fibrosis: lipid cores were 64.6% larger, and inflammatory cell
content had increased 2.7-fold. The amount of fibrosis decreased 49.6%, and
intraplaque hemorrhages and iron and fibrin deposition were observed frequently. 
TGFbetaRII:Fc treatment did not result in systemic effects. These results reveal 
a pivotal role for TGF-beta in the maintenance of the balance between
inflammation and fibrosis in atherosclerotic plaques.

PMID: 12067907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Circulation. 2002 Jun 11;105(23):2766-71.

In vivo imaging of proteolytic activity in atherosclerosis.

Chen J(1), Tung CH, Mahmood U, Ntziachristos V, Gyurko R, Fishman MC, Huang PL,
Weissleder R.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, USA.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture, the most important cause of acute
cardiovascular incidents, has been strongly associated with vascular
inflammation. On the basis of the hypothesis that the inflammatory response and
proteolysis lead to plaque rupture, we have examined the role of cathepsin B as a
model proteolytic enzyme.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using western-type diet-fed apoE and apoE/endothelial NO
synthase double knockout mice as models of atherosclerosis, we show (1) that
cathepsin B is upregulated in atherosclerotic lesions characterized by high
degrees of inflammation compared with normal aorta or silent lesions, (2) that
intravenously injectable novel cathepsin B imaging beacons are highly activated
within active atherosclerotic lesions and colocalize with cathepsin B
immunoreactivity, and (3) that cathepsin B activity in atherosclerotic lesions
can be imaged in whole animals by using a novel near-infrared tomographic imaging
system.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies indicate that cathepsin B, and potentially other
proteases, may serve as a biomarker for vulnerable plaques when probed with
beacons. The tomographic in vivo imaging method as well as catheter-based optical
sensing methods could be readily adapted to screening and potentially to the
molecular profiling of a number of proteases in vulnerable plaque in vivo.

PMID: 12057992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Circulation. 2002 Jun 11;105(23):2708-11.

Imaging atherosclerotic plaque inflammation with [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography.

Rudd JH(1), Warburton EA, Fryer TD, Jones HA, Clark JC, Antoun N, Johnström P,
Davenport AP, Kirkpatrick PJ, Arch BN, Pickard JD, Weissberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is usually a consequence of
inflammatory cell activity within the plaque. Current imaging techniques provide 
anatomic data but no indication of plaque inflammation. The glucose analogue
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) can be used to image inflammatory cell activity 
non-invasively by PET. In this study we tested whether 18FDG-PET imaging can
identify inflammation within carotid artery atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eight patients with symptomatic carotid atherosclerosis were
imaged using 18FDG-PET and co-registered CT. Symptomatic carotid plaques were
visible in 18FDG-PET images acquired 3 hours post-18FDG injection. The estimated 
net 18FDG accumulation rate (plaque/integral plasma) in symptomatic lesions was
27% higher than in contralateral asymptomatic lesions. There was no measurable
18FDG uptake into normal carotid arteries. Autoradiography of excised plaques
confirmed accumulation of deoxyglucose in macrophage-rich areas of the plaque.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that atherosclerotic plaque inflammation can
be imaged with 18FDG-PET, and that symptomatic, unstable plaques accumulate more 
18FDG than asymptomatic lesions.

PMID: 12057982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Circulation. 2002 May 28;105(21):2504-11.

Intimomedial interface damage and adventitial inflammation is increased beneath
disrupted atherosclerosis in the aorta: implications for plaque vulnerability.

Moreno PR(1), Purushothaman KR, Fuster V, O'Connor WN.

Author information: 
(1)Linda and Jack Gill Heart Institute, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40511, 
USA. pmoreno@pop.uky.edu

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic plaque progression is frequently accompanied by
compensatory enlargement to preserve the lumen. These enlarging plaques develop
features of vulnerability, however, leading to disruption and lumen obstruction. 
This complex transition from compensatory expansion to plaque disruption may not 
derive solely from progressive intimal disease. Concurrent changes at the
intimomedial interface and within the tunica media and adventitia may play a role
in plaque instability. We tested this hypothesis by investigating whether
interface changes, including internal elastic lamina (IEL) rupture, and medial
and adventitial changes, including inflammation, fibrosis, and atrophy, more
frequently accompany disrupted than nondisrupted atherosclerotic plaques.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Computerized planimetry and ocular micrometry were used for 
systematic quantification of intimal, medial, and adventitial histopathological
features in 598 human aortic plaques according to the AHA classification.
Disrupted plaques exhibited larger plaque and lipid pool areas (P=0.0001) and a
higher incidence of rupture of the IEL (P=0.0001). Medial and adventitial
inflammation (P=0.01), medial fibrosis (P=0.0001), and medial atrophy (P=0.0001) 
were also higher in disrupted plaques. Furthermore, medial thickness was reduced 
in disrupted plaques (P=0.0001). Logistic regression analysis identified rupture 
of the IEL as an independent predictor for fibrous cap disruption (P=0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with nondisrupted plaques, disrupted plaques have an
increased incidence of IEL rupture, medial and adventitial inflammation, medial
fibrosis, and medial atrophy. These intimomedial interface and adventitial
changes may play a role in the natural history of complex atherosclerotic
lesions. The interaction between medial and adventitial pathology and the intimal
atherosclerotic process deserves further investigation.

PMID: 12034657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2002 Apr;50(2):75-83.

Atherosclerotic plaque burden, plaque vulnerability and arterial remodeling: the 
role of inflammation.

Vink A(1), Pasterkamp G.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiology Laboratory Heart Lung Center Utrecht, University
Medical Center Utrecht and Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the
Netherlands Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Atherosclerotic narrowing of the arterial lumen is caused by gradual plaque
growth and arterial remodeling. Expansive remodeling retards and constrictive
remodeling accelerates narrowing of the lumen by plaque accumulation. In the
acute phase luminal narrowing may be accelerated by rupture of a vulnerable
plaque and subsequent thrombus formation. Inflammatory cells are key players in
all these determinants of atherosclerotic luminal narrowing. Inflammatory cells
are present in both early and advanced stages of atherosclerosis. Chronic
infections have been suggested as trigger of arterial inflammation, but no causal
relationship has yet been proved. Systemic markers of inflammation, like
C-reactive protein, are predictors for the occurrence of future adverse
cardiovascular events, confirming the role of inflammatory responses in arterial 
occlusive disease. In this review the central role of inflammation in
atherosclerotic luminal narrowing will be discussed.

PMID: 12032461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


559. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2002 Apr;80(4):354-9.

ACE inhibition and atherogenesis.

Schölkens BA(1), Landgraf W.

Author information: 
(1)Aventis Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Business Unit Cardiology/Thrombosis, Bad
Soden, Germany. Bernward.Schoelkens@aventis.com

Recent clinical studies such as HOPE, SECURE, and APRES show that
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors like ramipril improve the
prognosis of patients with a high risk of atherothrombotic cardiovascular events.
Atherosclerosis, as a chronic inflammatory condition of the vascular system, can 
turn into an acute clinical event through the rupture of a vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaque followed by thrombosis. ACE inhibition has a beneficial
effect on the atherogenic setting and on fibrinolysis. Endothelial dysfunction is
the end of a common process in which cardiovascular risk factors contribute to
inflammation and atherogenesis. By inhibiting the formation of angiotensin II,
ACE inhibitors prevent any damaging effects on endothelial function, vascular
smooth muscle cells, and inflammatory vascular processes. An increase in the
release of NO under ACE inhibition has a protective effect. Local
renin-angiotensin systems in the tissue are involved in the inflammatory
processes in the atherosclerotic plaque. Circulating ACE-containing monocytes,
which adhere to endothelial cell lesions, differentiate within the vascular wall 
to ACE-containing macrophages or foam cells with increased local synthesis of ACE
and angiotensin II. Within the vascular wall, angiotensin II decisively
contributes to the instability of the plaque by stimulating growth factors,
adhesion molecules, chemotactic proteins, cytokines, oxidized LDL, and matrix
metalloproteinases. Suppression of the increased ACE activity within the plaque
can lead to the stabilization and deactivation of the plaque by reducing
inflammation in the vascular wall, thus lessening the risk of rupture and
thrombosis and the resultant acute clinical cardiovascular events. The remarkable
improvement in the long-term prognosis of atherosclerotic patients with increased
cardiovascular risk might be the clinical result of the contribution made by ACE 
inhibition in the vascular wall.

PMID: 12025972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


560. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2002 Mar-Apr;44(5):357-68.

Pathophysiology of coronary thrombosis: role of plaque rupture and plaque
erosion.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Burns and Allen
Research Institute, and Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center and
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death in much of the western
world. Atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries contribute to luminal
obstruction leading to myocardial ischemia; however, abrupt coronary artery
occlusion most frequently results from superimposition of a thrombus on a
disrupted plaque, leading to the most serious clinical manifestations of coronary
artery disease, ie, unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, and sudden
death. Plaque that have undergone disruption and, by inference, plaques at risk
for disruption (vulnerable plaques), tend to demonstrate outward vessel
remodeling, contain a large lipid core, thinned out fibrous cap, reduced collagen
content, and increased inflammatory cell infiltration. Plaque stabilization
through change in plaque composition may be responsible for reduced frequency of 
acute vaso-occlusive events observed with lipid and other risk-factor modifying
interventions.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12024334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 May 1;22(5):782-7.

Long pentraxin PTX3 upregulates tissue factor expression in human endothelial
cells: a novel link between vascular inflammation and clotting activation.

Napoleone E(1), Di Santo A, Bastone A, Peri G, Mantovani A, de Gaetano G, Donati 
MB, Lorenzet R.

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Taticchi Unit for Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis, Department of
Vascular Medicine and Pharmacology, Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri,
Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, S. Maria Imbaro, Italy.

Inflammation is a major contributing factor to atherosclerotic plaque development
and ischemic heart disease. PTX3 is a long pentraxin that was recently found to
be increased in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Because tissue factor 
(TF), the in vivo trigger of blood coagulation, plays a dominant role in thrombus
formation after plaque rupture, we tested the possibility that PTX3 could
modulate TF expression. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, incubated with
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide) or the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, expressed TF. The presence of PTX3 increased TF 
activity and antigen severalfold in a dose-dependent fashion. PTX3 exerted its
effect at the transcription level, inasmuch as the increased levels of TF mRNA,
mediated by the stimuli, were enhanced in its presence. The increase in mRNA
determined by PTX3 originated from an enhanced nuclear binding activity of the
transacting factor c-Rel/p65, which was mediated by the agonists and measured by 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The mechanism underlying the increased
c-Rel/p65 activity resided in an enhanced degradation of the c-Rel/p65 inhibitory
protein IkappaBalpha. In the area of vascular injury, during the inflammatory
response, cell-mediated fibrin deposition takes place. Our results suggest that
PTX3, by increasing TF expression, potentially plays a role in thrombogenesis and
ischemic vascular disease.

PMID: 12006390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


562. Clin Chim Acta. 2002 May 7;319(1):19-26.

Elevated soluble CD40 ligand is related to the endothelial adhesion molecules in 
patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Peng DQ(1), Zhao SP, Li YF, Li J, Zhou HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China. pengdq@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence indicates that the CD40-CD40L interaction plays a
pivotal role in the inflammatory regulation of atherosclerosis. Adhesion
molecules especially the vascular adhesion molecules also play an important role 
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis which act as markers of inflammation.
These inflammatory factors render vulnerability to the atherosclerotic plaque by 
triggering the fissure, rupture, and subsequent thrombosis, leading to the
clinical scenario of unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction.
METHODS: The difference of sCD40L concentration in different subtype of coronary 
heart disease and its relationship with vascular adhesion molecules was
investigated. Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (EIA) was used to measure the
serum sCD40L, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), and soluble
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1).
RESULTS: The sCD40L concentration was significantly higher in patients with acute
coronary syndrome (ACS) (3.17+/-2.84 ng/ml) than in controls (1.19+/-1.05 ng/ml, 
p<0.01) and in patients with stable coronary heart disease (1.61+/-1.46 ng/ml,
p<0.05). The sCD40L concentration was positively correlated with sICAM-1
(r=0.413, p<0.01), triglycerides (TG) (r=0.23, p<0.05), apoB (r=0.248, p<0.05),
and HDL-cholesterol (r=-0.253, p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The sCD40L concentration was increased in acute coronary syndrome,
suggesting the possible relation of CD40L to the pathogenesis. The serum CD40L
concentration was positively correlated with adhesion molecule and was negatively
associated with serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C).

PMID: 11922919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Med Klin (Munich). 2002 Feb 15;97(2):63-9.

[Acute coronary syndrome--better risk stratification by determination of
inflammatory parameters?].

[Article in German]

Link A(1), Böhm M, Nickenig G.

Author information: 
(1)Innere Medizin III (Kardiologie/Angiologie), Universitätskliniken des
Saarlandes, Homburg/Saar. andreas.link@telemed.de

BACKGROUND: In the past years coronary atherosclerosis and plaque rupture have
been characterized not only as a problem of growth of smooth vascular cells, of
activated thrombocytes and coagulation but also of inflammation.
PARAMETERS OF INFLAMMATION: Several studies have demonstrated the importance of
C-reactive protein as a marker for cardiovascular complications. Also
interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and adhesion molecules are discussed
as predictors of a poor prognosis in patients with acute coronary syndromes.
RISK STRATIFICATION: A positive troponin T test is correlated with an increased
rate of early complications; thus, these patients benefit from an aggressive
therapy with GP IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists and acute coronary intervention.
The C-reactive protein is predictive for late complications such as restenosis,
reinfarction and death due to cardiac events; these patients benefit from close
controls and from an anti-inflammatory therapy with acetylsalicyclic acid and
statins.

PMID: 11910871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Ther Umsch. 2002 Feb;59(2):61-5.

[Etiology of acute coronary syndrome--unstable plaque].

[Article in German]

Meyer BJ(1), Claeys D.

Author information: 
(1)Herzzentrum Bern, Klinik Beau-Site, Bern. meyer@herzzentrum-bern.ch

Our perception of the mechanisms underlying the acute complications of
atherosclerosis has significantly changed in the last decade. Most coronary
thromboses result from a rupture or a fissure in the protective fibrous cap of
atherosclerotic plaque, but less common from a superficial erosion. The extent of
thrombosis is a determinant of the clinical picture of acute coronary syndromes. 
Until now, we held a high grade stenosis responsible for the vast majority of
acute coronary syndromes. However, current findings establish the relevance of
qualitative aspects of plaques as important determinants of the vulnerability of 
plaques, i.e. the risk to cause acute complications. Among morphologic and
functional features of plaques, inflammation has emerged as a leading
pathophysiologic mechanism. In addition to local effect of inflammation at the
level of the unstable plaque itself, systemic factors of the inflammatory
response may alter the thrombogenicity of a vulnerable plaque. Knowledge of the
role of inflammation helps us to understand the mechanisms by which therapeutic
efforts can reduce clinical events. The clinical benefits of dietary
modifications, pharmacotherapy with statins, and ACE inhibitors may be due in
part to an anti-inflammatory action.

PMID: 11887550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Heart. 2002 Mar;87(3):201-4.

Inflammation in acute coronary syndromes.

Mulvihill NT(1), Foley JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Republic of Ireland. 
mulvihin@hotmail.com

Extensive evidence supports a pathogenic role for both local and systemic
inflammation in acute coronary syndromes. However, several important questions
remain unanswered. Is the observed inflammatory process a precursor or a
consequence of coronary plaque rupture? Is the inflammatory component of unstable
coronary disease a potential therapeutic target? Finally, do infectious agents
have a pathogenic role in coronary atherosclerosis and acute coronary syndromes?

PMCID: PMC1767031
PMID: 11847151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Dec;947:167-79; discussion 179-80.

Inflammation and atherothrombosis.

Robbie L(1), Libby P.

Author information: 
(1)Leducq Center for Cardiovascular Research, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

An immune and inflammatory response involving endothelial and smooth muscle cells
accompanies the accumulation of lipids and fibrous materials in atheromatous
arteries. The inflammatory response involves not only the intrinsic cells of the 
artery wall, but also circulating leukocytes. Lymphocytes as well as macrophages 
participate importantly in this disease process. Plaque composition and
vulnerability have emerged as more critical determinants of plaque rupture than
the degree of lumenal stenosis. Thus, plaque biology has proven more important
than gross morphology in determining the clinical consequences of the disease.
Rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque, its thrombotic complications, and their
sequelae have gained increased recognition as the proximate causes of disability 
and death due to related syndromes such as acute myocardial infarction. Arterial 
thromboses occur much more readily in arteries damaged or distorted by the
atherosclerotic process. The consequences of a given plaque disruption and
subsequent thrombus formation will depend on both "systemic" or fluid phase
determinants and local "solid state" factors. The complex heterogeneous structure
of thrombi includes fibrin, platelets, erythrocytes, and leukocytes. The local
balance of proteases and inhibitors on the fibrin and cell surfaces will
determine thrombus stability and persistence. Enhanced understanding of the
processes involved in the development and progression of atherosclerosis and its 
complications will surely provide areas that can be targeted in the treatment of 
the disease.

PMID: 11795264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 2001 Nov;94(11 Suppl):1210-7.

[From the physiopathology of thrombosis to therapeutic targets].

[Article in French]

Nurden P(1), Ndoko S, Nurden AT.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5533 CNRS, hôpital cardiologique, 33604 Pessac.

Structural changes in blood vessels associated with atherosclerosis are at the
onset of arterial thrombosis. Thrombi form at the sites of plaque rupture.
Plateletrich masses accumulate in the vessel lumen perturb blood flow, thereby
aggravating ischemic syndromes. Other local modifications include the recruitment
of cells with inflammatory and immunologic potential, showing how complicated
this process is. The demonstration that aspirin lowered the number of thrombotic 
events was an important step in proving the value of anti-platelet therapy. Since
then, newer strategies involving drugs acting on the fibrinogen receptor (the
GPIIb-IIIa complex) or on ADP receptors have evolved largely as a result of the
increased knowledge of the biological pathways of platelet aggregation. These
drugs have given superior results in many international trials and their
usefulness in interventional cardiology has been proven. Such encouraging
progress also incites efforts to find new and improved targets for anti-platelet 
therapy as well as testing new associations of existing anti-platelet drugs which
may also be used with anticoagulant therapies, and in the future, be combined
with drugs directly preventing restenosis.

PMID: 11794961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Circulation. 2002 Jan 22;105(3):297-303.

Morphological predictors of arterial remodeling in coronary atherosclerosis.

Burke AP(1), Kolodgie FD, Farb A, Weber D, Virmani R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although arterial remodeling in atherosclerotic arteries affects
luminal patency, the role of plaque components has not been systematically
studied.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coronary segments (n=2885) were harvested from the hearts of
36 patients who died of severe coronary artery disease after perfusion fixation. 
Remodeling was determined by morphometric analysis of 657 sections selected as
reference segments and 1318 segments with atheromatous plaques. Atherosclerotic
plaques were identified as fibroatheroma, thin-cap fibroatheroma, intraplaque
hemorrhage with or without rupture or erosion, or total occlusion. Plaque
components consisted of calcification, lipid core, macrophage burden, and
fibrosis. There was no correlation between plaque area and lumen size in proximal
arteries, unlike middle and distal segments, which demonstrated a significant
correlation. Marked expansion of the internal elastic lamina (IEL) occurred in
plaque hemorrhages with or without and thin-cap fibroatheroma (vulnerable
plaque), whereas in erosions and total occlusions there was shrinkage of the IEL.
Macrophage burden, lipid core size, calcium (in fibrous plaque and lipid core),
and medial atrophy were all associated with positive remodeling; fibrous areas,
however, were negatively associated with remodeling.
CONCLUSIONS: Inflammation, calcification, and medial thinning are primary
determinants of positive remodeling, which appears to be a feature of plaque
instability.

PMID: 11804983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Ital Heart J. 2001 Nov;2(11):796-800.

Inflammatory mechanisms in atherosclerosis: from laboratory evidence to clinical 
application.

Blake GJ(1), Ridker PM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Department of Medicine, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Havard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

From the initial stages of leukocyte recruitment to diseased endothelium, to
eventual rupture of unstable atheromatous plaque, pro-inflammatory mechanisms
mediate key steps in atherogenesis and its complications. Lipid lowering, both
with diet and statin therapy, has been shown to have favorable effects on
inflammatory processes in atheromatous plaque. Several plasma markers of
inflammation have been found to predict future cardiovascular risk, both among
patients with acute coronary syndromes and myocardial infarction, and among
healthy men and women. C-reactive protein (CRP), a pattern recognition molecule
linked to the innate immune system, is a sensitive marker of low-grade vascular
inflammation, which may also have direct pro-inflammatory actions. Recent studies
have shown that statin therapy may lower CRP levels independent of lipid-lowering
effects. Statin therapy may also be highly effective for the prevention of
cardiovascular events among individuals with elevated CRP levels. The role of
statin therapy for plaque stabilization in acute coronary syndromes, and for
prevention of future plaque rupture among healthy individuals with evidence of
vascular inflammation, is an area of active research.

PMID: 11770860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


570. Atherosclerosis. 2002 Jan;160(1):161-5.

Association of serum MMP-9 with autoantibodies against oxidized LDL.

Kalela A(1), Koivu TA, Höyhtyä M, Jaakkola O, Lehtimäki T, Sillanaukee P, Nikkari
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Tampere Medical School,
University of Tampere, FIN-33014 Tampere, Finland.

Monocyte-derived macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques secrete matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), which may contribute to plaque rupture. There has been
much speculation as to which factors precipitate in the arterial inflammation.
Oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) has been suggested to have
proinflammatory properties, and it has been shown to increase matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) secretion by macrophages in vitro. We determined
serum MMP-9 concentration and autoantibodies against oxLDL by ELISA in men with
angina pectoris (n=243) and age-matched controls (n=238). The association between
serum MMP-9 concentration and autoantibodies against oxLDL was evaluated.
Autoantibody level against oxLDL, expressed in optical density units, was
significantly higher in subjects with angina pectoris compared to controls
(0.100+/-0.064 versus 0.088+/-0.051, respectively, P=0.030), but serum levels of 
MMP-9 did not differ significantly between these groups (54.2+/-29.9 versus
50.6+/-23.1 microg/l). However, autoantibodies against oxLDL correlated
positively with serum MMP-9 (r=0.21, P<0.001). In a multiple regression model
(including age, diastolic blood pressure, cholesterol, HDL cholesterol,
triglycerides, BMI, smoking and MMP-9) serum MMP-9 (beta=0.200, P<0.001) and
smoking (beta=0.179, P<0.001) were significantly associated with autoantibodies
against oxLDL. In conclusion, autoantibodies against oxLDL were positively
associated with angina pectoris and serum MMP-9. Since autoantibody level against
oxLDL could be expected to reflect the degree of oxLDL in the vessel wall, our
results suggest that oxLDL is associated with MMP-9 in vivo.

PMID: 11755934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Clin Cardiol. 2001 Nov;24(11):701-4.

Interleukin-6 and acute coronary syndrome.

Ikeda U(1), Ito T, Shimada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
uikeda@jichi.ac.jp

The designation of atherosclerosis as a chronic inflammatory process represents
an exciting and logical paradigm shift for cardiologists. Plasma concentrations
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its hepatic by-product C-reactive protein (CRP)
appear to reflect the intensity of occult plaque inflammation and by inference
may determine vulnerability to rupture. Indeed, circulating IL-6 levels are
elevated in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and also in patients
with unstable, but not with stable angina. Coronary sinus IL-6 concentrations are
also increased after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), and late
restenosis correlates with an increase in IL-6 concentration after the procedure,
indicating that IL-6 expression may be not only related to instability of
atheromatous plaques, but also to the formation of restenotic lesions after PCI. 
These observations suggest the advantage of screening for circulating IL-6
concentration and the use of anti-inflammatory treatment for those thought be at 
high risk to reduce the risk of future AMI.

PMID: 11714126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


572. J Med Eng Technol. 2001 Sep-Oct;25(5):181-4.

Determining the temperature distribution of swine aorta with simulated
atheromatous plaque under pulsed laser irradiation: an experimental attempt to
detect the vulnerability of atherosclerosis.

Matsui T(1), Arai T, Matsumura K, Ishizuka T, Hagisawa K, Takase B, Sato S,
Suzuki M, Kikuchi M, Kurita A.

Author information: 
(1)National Defense Medical College, Research Institute, Division of Biomedical
Engineering, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Japan.

We developed a method to determine the temperature distribution of swine aortas
with simulated atheromatous plaques in order to measure the temperature of
atherosclerotic lesions. The inflammation associated with temperature elevation
is considered to be one of the aggravating mechanisms of atherosclerosis
resulting in fissuring or rupture of atheromatous plaques. The temperature
distribution of plaques covered by fibrous caps cannot be measured by
conventional thermistors. Indocyanine green (ICG) solution was injected into the 
subintima of swine aorta to simulate the light absorption coefficient of human
atheromatous plaques. The temperature distribution was calculated from measured
temperature changes of the aortic intima under pulsed laser irradiation. The
aorta was heated from the adventitial side with a halogen lamp to simulate the
temperature elevation derived from inflammation. The temperature distribution of 
the aorta was obtained by solving the heat transfer equation using the surface
layer thickness (corresponding to the fibrous cap thickness). The surface layer
thickness can be calculated using the following working formula:
D(microm)=1363-398DeltaTs+35DeltaTs(2), where AT, denotes intimal surface
temperature change under pulsed laser irradiation. The calculated temperature of 
the ICG layer (corresponding to the atheromatous core) correlated well with the
measured temperature (r=0. 97, p<0.0001).

PMID: 11695657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Circ Res. 2001 Oct 26;89(9):763-71.

Novel clinical markers of vascular wall inflammation.

Blake GJ(1), Ridker PM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Department of Medicine, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Inflammatory processes play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
and mediate many of the stages of atheroma development from initial leukocyte
recruitment to eventual rupture of the unstable atherosclerotic plaque. Elevated 
plasma levels of several markers of the inflammatory cascade have been shown to
predict future risk of plaque rupture. These markers include P-selectin,
interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule-1, and C-reactive protein (CRP). Produced in the liver in response to
interleukin-6, CRP has emerged as the most powerful inflammatory marker of future
cardiovascular risk. Initially considered an innocent bystander in the
atherosclerotic process, recent evidence suggests that CRP may have direct
proinflammatory effects. Numerous large-scale, prospective studies have found
that elevated baseline levels of CRP are a strong independent predictor of future
vascular risk. Furthermore, aspirin and statin therapy appear to be particularly 
effective among individuals with high CRP levels. The addition of CRP screening
to traditional lipid testing has the potential to identify individuals at high
risk for future cardiovascular events who may benefit from targeted preventive
interventions.

PMID: 11679405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Oct 11;88(7B):3J-6J.

What have we learned about the biology of atherosclerosis? The role of
inflammation.

Libby P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

In the past, we believed that atherosclerosis gradually and progressively led to 
the complete occlusion of an artery, thereby causing acute coronary events.
However, we now understand that rupture of a nonstenotic, yet vulnerable
atherosclerotic plaque frequently leads to an acute coronary syndrome.
Rupture-prone plaques typically have a thin fibrous cap, numerous inflammatory
cells, a substantial lipid core, and surprisingly few smooth muscle cells.
Physical disruption of such a plaque allows circulating blood coagulation factors
to meet with the highly thrombogenic material in the plaque's lipid core, thereby
instigating the formation of a potentially occluding and fatal thrombus. Much
evidence implicates inflammation in the thinning of the fibrous cap and the
disruption of the vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque. Lipid lowering undisputedly 
reduces the incidence of acute coronary events. However, the hypothesis that the 
mechanism of event reduction involves regression of fixed stenoses has proved
untenable. In 14 angiographic studies, treatment of abnormal lipid levels
increased luminal diameter only modestly, in stark contrast to the resounding and
consistent decrease in acute coronary events produced by lipid lowering.
Therefore, we now believe that lipid-lowering treatments, such as statins, modify
plaques qualitatively as much as quantitatively, reducing inflammation and
stabilizing noncritically stenotic, yet vulnerable plaques. Studies in rabbits
with diet-induced atherosclerosis have shown that reducing cholesterol
consumption indeed decreases inflammation in atheroma and improves those features
of plaques associated with stability.

PMID: 11595192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


575. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 2001 Sep;101(9 Suppl):S1-5.

Recent discoveries in assessment of coronary heart disease: impact of vascular
mechanisms on development of atherosclerosis.

Chilton RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory, Audie L. Murphy Memorial Veterans
Hospital/University of Texas Health Science Center, Cardiology Department, San
Antonio, Texas, USA. chilton@uthscsa.edu

Until recently, arterial stenosis and occlusion due to buildup of atherosclerotic
plaque were recognized as the primary causes of coronary heart disease (CHD).
Currently, CHD is viewed as a lifelong process of endothelial inflammation,
thrombosis, and plaque instability and rupture. Lifestyle modification is an
important first step in prevention of CHD, but even those patients who are the
most committed to following a healthy diet and lifestyle frequently require the
addition of drug therapy to further reduce risk. The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) reduce risk by lowering low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels, as well as by stabilizing plaques, restoring
endothelial function, and counteracting oxidative and inflammatory processes.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors also have antiatherogenic properties.
Early, aggressive lipid intervention is the key to primary and secondary
prevention of CHD.

PMID: 11575041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


576. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2001 Sep 15;58(18):1709-18; quiz 1719-21.

Recognition, pathophysiology, and management of acute myocardial infarction.

Cheng JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arnold & Marie Schwartz College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long Island
University, Brooklyn, NY, USA. jcheng@liu.edu

New insights into the pathophysiology of atherosclerotic plaques leading to acute
myocardial infarction (MI) are discussed, along with new diagnostic and treatment
strategies. Ischemic heart disease represents a continuum from stable angina to
unstable angina to non-Q-wave MI to Q-wave MI. Patients whose angina becomes
unstable are classified as having acute coronary syndrome (ACS). It was formerly 
believed that thrombosis leading to critical occlusion of coronary arteries at
the site of atherosclerotic plaque rupture was the common cause of ischemic heart
disease. It is now thought that even lesions that do not critically occlude
coronary arteries can cause MI. ACS can be caused by the rupture of an unstable
atherosclerotic plaque. Vulnerable plaques are usually those causing only mild to
moderate stenosis and having a lipid-rich core and a thin, macrophage-dense,
collagen-poor fibrous cap. Factors affecting plaque rupture include mechanical
injury, circadian rhythm, inflammation, and infection. Progressive thrombosis and
vasospasm may follow plaque rupture. The diagnosis of MI starts with the
recognition of symptoms of myocardial ischemia that are new or different from the
usual pattern. Agents used to prevent or treat plaque rupture and its
complications include thrombolytics, antiplatelet agents, antithrombotics,
beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and nitrates. Once
patients survive the acute phase of MI, long-term therapy for prevention of
future events begins. Post-MI patients should receive aspirin, beta-blockers, and
an ACE inhibitor indefinitely; modification of cardiovascular risk factors is
also important. Greater understanding of the pathophysiology of ACS has led to
strategies to limit the progression of atherosclerosis and to improve survival
and function after an acute event.

PMID: 11571813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2001 Oct;12(5):535-41.

Apoptosis in atherosclerosis: focus on oxidized lipids and inflammation.

Martinet W(1), Kockx MM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.

An increasing body of evidence from both animal models and human specimens
suggests that apoptosis or programmed cell death is a major event in the
pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. Although the significance of apoptosis in
atherosclerosis remains unclear, it has been proposed that apoptotic cell death
contributes to plaque instability, rupture and thrombus formation. Biochemical
and genetic analyses of apoptosis provide an increasingly detailed picture of the
intracellular signaling pathways involved. Nevertheless, it remains to be
determined whether apoptosis can become a clinically important approach to
modulate plaque progression. In this review, we have outlined some of the most
recent results concerning apoptosis in atherosclerosis with a special focus on
oxidized lipids, inflammation and therapeutic regulation of the apoptotic cell
death process.

PMID: 11561173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


578. J Cardiovasc Risk. 2001 Aug;8(4):187-94.

PPARS in inflammation, atherosclerosis and thrombosis.

Duez H(1), Fruchart JC, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)UR545 INSERM, Départment d'Athérosclérose, Institut Pasteur de Lille and
Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de Lille, France.

Comment in
    J Cardiovasc Risk. 2001 Aug;8(4):185-6.

PPARs are transcription factors which regulate lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, 
glucose homeostasis and cellular differentiation. PPARalpha enhances fatty acid
oxidation whereas PPARgamma promotes adipogenesis and fatty acid storage in
adipose tissue. Both PPARalpha and PPARgamma improve glucose homeostasis.
PPARalpha and PPARgamma are activated by the pharmacological agents fibrates and 
glitazones respectively, and by natural fatty acid derivatives, including
inflammation mediators. PPARs are expressed in the different cell types of human 
atherosclerotic lesions where they regulate the expression of genes involved in
the inflammatory response and lipid homeostasis. PPARs modulate the recruitment
and adhesion of leukocytes and monocytes to the atherosclerotic lesion. PPARs
furthermore control macrophage lipid homeostasis through their action on
scavenger receptors and by regulating genes involved in the first steps of the
reverse cholesterol transport pathway. Finally, PPARs regulate genes controlling 
thrombogenicity associated with plaque rupture. These observations suggest that
PPARs modulate atherosclerosis development by acting at both metabolic and
vascular levels. This review will essentially focus on the functions of PPARalpha
and PPARgamma in immunoregulation, vascular inflammation and thrombosis
associated to atherosclerosis.

PMID: 11550996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


579. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001 Sep;38(3):718-23.

Plaque burden, arterial remodeling and plaque vulnerability: determined by
systemic factors?

Vink A(1), Schoneveld AH, Richard W, de Kleijn DP, Falk E, Borst C, Pasterkamp G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to determine whether arterial remodeling and 
plaque vulnerability are influenced by systemic factors.
BACKGROUND: Atherosclerotic luminal narrowing is caused by gradual plaque growth 
and arterial remodeling. In the acute phase, luminal narrowing may be accelerated
by acute thrombus formation, usually precipitated by rupture of a vulnerable
plaque.
METHODS: Femoral arteries were obtained from elderly individuals at autopsy.
Pairs of atherosclerotic femoral arteries from 42 individuals were examined. The 
arteries were divided in 1-cm intervals. Plaque size, the mode of arterial
remodeling and histopathologic characteristics of plaque vulnerability
(lipid-rich core and plaque inflammation) were compared between right and left
femoral arteries obtained from the same individual. A role for systemic factors
was assumed if a phenomenon was equally present in both arteries.
RESULTS: There was concordance in average plaque size (r(2) = 0.5, p < 0.001),
expansive remodeling (kappa = 0.42, p = 0.007) and occurrence of plaques
containing a large lipid-rich core (kappa = 0.60, p = 0.001), but no concordance 
in plaque inflammation (kappa = 0.067, p = 0.61) between right and left arteries.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that not only the amount of atherosclerosis,
but also arterial remodeling and lipid deposition in plaques, are influenced by
systemic factors. The nonhomogeneous distribution of inflammation in
atherosclerotic arteries supports the hypothesis that plaque inflammation is
locally affected.

PMID: 11527623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Nucl Med Commun. 2001 Jul;22(7):747-53.

Detection of atherosclerosis using a novel positron-sensitive probe and
18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).

Lederman RJ(1), Raylman RR, Fisher SJ, Kison PV, San H, Nabel EG, Wahl RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, USA. 
rlederma@umich.edu

Inflammation contributes to atherosclerotic plaque remodeling, enlargement and
rupture. Non-invasive imaging of coronary artery inflammation could help target
therapy to 'vulnerable' atheromata, but is limited because of small tissue mass
and arterial motion. Local radiopharmaceutical imaging may overcome some of these
limitations. We used a positron-sensitive fiberoptic probe, which can distinguish
positron emissions from annihilation photons, to identify diseased from healthy
endothelium in an atherosclerotic model. New Zealand White rabbits underwent
Fogarty-catheter injury of an iliac artery and then were fed a high-fat diet for 
3 weeks. Fasted animals received 90-180 MBq of 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) 2-4 h 
before sacrifice and harvest of injured and uninjured iliacs. Arteries were
incised longitudinally and the probe was placed in contact with the arterial
intima. Multiple measurements were obtained along 1 cm artery segments in 60 s
intervals, and corrected for 18F decay and background. Measurements were recorded
over 93 injured and normal artery segments in 11 animals. Mean probe Z-scores
were 4.8-fold higher (CI 3.4-6.3) over injury atherosclerosis compared with
uninjured normal iliac artery segments (P<0.001). Gamma counting confirmed that
injured artery segments accumulated more FDG per gram than did normal segments
(0.203% x kg injected dose per gram of tissue versus 0.042, P<0.001).
Non-arterial tissue also accumulated FDG avidly, particularly reticuloendothelial
tissues and blood. Delayed sacrifice, 4 h compared with 2 h after animal FDG
injection, further reduced blood background counts and improved the
signal-to-noise ratio. Histopathology confirmed that injured iliac artery had
significantly higher intimal and medial cross-sectional area compared with
uninjured artery. Injured artery also had significantly higher macrophage and
smooth muscle cell density. Positron-sensitive probe counts correlated with the
intima to media ratio (r =0.63, P = 0.03). Our positron-sensitive probe
distinguishes atherosclerotic from healthy artery in a blood-free field.
Intravascular study of plaque biology may be feasible using FDG and a
positron-sensitive probe.

PMID: 11453046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Endocr Pract. 2000 May-Jun;6(3):272-6.

Inflammation, insulin resistance, infection, diabetes, and atherosclerosis.

Bell DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the relationship between poor control of blood glucose in
patients with diabetes and potential for occurrence of the acute coronary
syndrome.
METHODS: The role of advanced glycosylated end products in endothelial
dysfunction is discussed, and the possible contributions of inflammation and
infection in the rupture of atheromatous plaques are described.
RESULTS: Hyperglycemia predisposes to infection by decreasing the efficacy of
leukocytes and allowing increased formation of advanced glycosylated end
products. The associated endothelial permeability facilitates bacterial
infiltration of atheromatous plaques. Reported associations between chronic
infection and coronary artery disease have involved primarily Chlamydia
pneumoniae. The insulin resistance syndrome is also characterized by compromised 
endothelial function, which may predispose patients to unstable plaques and
cardiac events.
CONCLUSION: In patients with diabetes, poor glycemic control may lead to
excessive advanced glycosylated end products, inflammation and infection of
atheromatous plaques, and plaque rupture that can cause angina or myocardial
infarction.

PMID: 11421545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


582. Herz. 2001 Apr;26 Suppl 1:9-18.

[The role of inflammation and infection in acute coronary syndrome].

[Article in German]

Blankenberg S(1), Rupprecht HJ, Bickel C, Hafner G, Meyer J.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität Mainz.
stefan.blankenberg@uni-mainz.de

INFLAMMATORY PROCESS: Within the vessel wall is considered to be crucial for
initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. As response to endothelial injury 
a focal inflammatory response arises which can lead to plaque vulnerability and
rupture and a consecutive acute coronary syndrome. Systemic markers of
inflammation like C-reactive protein (CRP) or interleukin (IL) 6 are elevated in 
stable angina and acute coronary syndrome and are associated with future
cardiovascular events even in initially healthy people. Alongside classical risk 
factors infectious agents like cytomegalovirus or Chlamydia pneumoniae are
discussed to be involved in the local and systemic inflammatory response.
Seroepidemiological studies revealed disparate results of the association between
antibody titers against Chlamydia pneumoniae or cytomegalovirus and prevalence of
coronary artery disease or future cardiovascular events. In animal models
Chlamydia pneumoniae and cytomegalovirus increase accelerated neointimal
response, however, molecular mechanisms are not entirely clear.CONCLUSION:
Whereas local and systemic inflammatory processes play a crucial role in
atherogenesis and prognosis the causal role of infection in atherogenesis remains
controversial.

PMID: 11349630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


583. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2001 Apr 1;197(1):1-9.

Chlamydia pneumoniae and atherosclerosis: does the evidence support a causal or
contributory role?

Mahony JB(1), Coombes BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, and the
Father Sean O'Sullivan Research Center, St. Joseph's Hospital, 50 Charlton Ave.
East, L8N 4A6, Hamilton, Ont., Canada. mahonyj@mcmaster.ca

The intracellular bacterial pathogen Chlamydia pneumoniae causes respiratory
tract infection and has been associated with atherosclerosis and coronary artery 
disease. Since atherosclerosis is a progressive disease and is considered to be a
chronic inflammation of the artery vessel wall, the interaction of C. pneumoniae 
with cells of the vasculature that can result in a local inflammatory response is
of paramount importance. In this essay we review the pathophysiology of
atherosclerosis in the context of C. pneumoniae infection and present an
integrated model that includes the involvement of C. pneumoniae in all stages of 
atherogenesis including initiation, inflammation, fibrous plaque formation,
plaque rupture and thrombosis. We hypothesize that acute and persistent infection
of professional immune cells (T-cells, monocytes and macrophages) and non-immune 
cells (endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells) contributes to a sustained
inflammatory response mediated by extensive cellular 'crosstalk' and numerous
cytokines/chemokines. This cascade of inflammatory mediators may contribute to
cellular dysfunction and tissue remodelling of the arterial intima. An improved
understanding of the precise mechanism(s) of C. pneumoniae involvement in
atherogenesis may help resolve the question of causality however, at the present 
time, we interpret the data as favoring a contributory rather than a causal role.
Future research directed at the discovery of chlamydial virulence factors
necessary for intracellular survival and subsequent alterations in host cell gene
expression including signalling pathways may be important for the design of
future clinical trials.

PMID: 11287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Cardiol Rev. 2001 Jan-Feb;9(1):31-5.

Inflammation and coronary heart disease: an overview.

Koenig W(1).

Author information: 
(1)FESC, FACC, Department of Internal Medicine II-Cardiology, University of Ulm
Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Strasse 8, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

About half of the patients presenting with myocardial infarction do not have the 
classic risk factors. This finding has stimulated a search for other factors that
may be responsible and, when present, may help to predict which patients are at
greatest risk for myocardial infarction and other cardiovascular events. With
improved understanding of the pathogenesis of ischemic heart disease, new
insights into potential markers of underlying atherosclerosis and cardiovascular 
risk have been gained. In recent years, data have accumulated demonstrating that 
certain markers of inflammation--both systemic and local--play a key role in the 
development of atherosclerosis. Specifically, elevated levels of one systemic
marker of inflammation, C-reactive protein, are associated with an increased risk
of cardiovascular disease events. Moreover, potentially important associations
have been established between elevated markers of inflammation, such as
C-reactive protein and increased efficacy of established therapies; and, in
particular, lipid-lowering therapy with the hepatic hydroxymethylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase inhibitor pravastatin. This article discusses the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, the role of endothelial dysfunction and plaque
rupture, and evidence for the role of inflammation and reviews how therapy might 
reduce vascular inflammation.

PMID: 11174913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Cardiol Rev. 2000 Jan-Feb;8(1):31-9.

Plaque disruption and thrombosis: potential role of inflammation and infection.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and the Atherosclerosis Research Center, Room 5347,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Shahp@chs.org

Acute coronary syndromes (unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, and
ischemic sudden death) result from coronary thrombosis superimposed on an
atherosclerotic plaque. Thrombosis is generally a consequence of disruption of
the atherosclerotic plaque in the form of a fissure/rupture in the fibrous cap
overlying a lipid-rich pool or superficial endothelial erosion covering a smooth 
muscle and proteoglycan-rich matrix with or without a lipid-core. Approximately
2/3 of acute coronary syndromes evolve from atherosclerotic plaques that are
minimally or mildly obstructive of the lumen before the acute event. Inflammation
with accumulation of activated mononuclear cells may play a potential role in
plaque disruption through the elaboration of proteases, such as matrix degrading 
neutral metalloproteinases and other proteases, inhibition of function and/or
survival, or promotion of apoptosis of matrix synthesizing smooth muscle cells.
Inflammation may also contribute to thrombosis after plaque disruption by
providing a source for tissue factor in the plaque. Inflammation in the plaque
may result from accumulation of modified lipids, oxidant and hemodynamic stress, 
and infectious agents, such as Chlamydia pneumoniae or pro-inflammatory triggers 
from distant sites of infection and inflammation (eg, chronic gingivitis and
chronic bronchitis). Improved insights into the pathophysiology of plaque
disruption and thrombosis are likely to provide new and improved methods of
stabilizing atherosclerotic disease process.

PMID: 11174871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Z Kardiol. 2000;89 Suppl 7:2-6.

An overview of the evolution of the atherosclerotic plaque: from fatty streak to 
plaque rupture and thrombosis.

Rosenfeld ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.
ssmjm@u.washington.edu

Today, there is a wealth of information concerning the chronology of the cellular
and molecular events associated with the development of cardiovascular diseases. 
It is now clear that atherosclerosis is largely a result of a dysregulated
fibroproliferative inflammatory response [1]. Treatment of cardiovascular disease
is rapidly adapting to this new knowledge and the future holds great potential
for preventing the disease by blocking the process at multiple stages. This short
review provides an overview of the evolution of the atherosclerotic plaque. It
focuses on three basic stages of the disease processes: initiation of the fatty
streak, transition of the fatty streak to an atheroma, and progression and
destabilization of the lesions leading to plaque rupture and occlusive
thrombosis. It includes a discussion of the molecular and cellular biology of the
atherogenic process with an emphasis on key molecular mediators of the disease
process and provides three tables which list examples of some of the key
molecular mediators and the stages in which they are purported to play a role.

PMID: 11098552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2000;10 Suppl 5:1-8.

Biology of arterial atheroma.

Willeit J(1), Kiechl S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Innsbruck University Clinic, Innsbruck, Austria.
Johann.Willeit@uibk.ac.at

Endothelial dysfunction and changes in arterial wall morphology including
thickening of the tunica intima, excess synthesis of collagenous matrix
(fibroblastic intimal thickening) and permanent or dynamic deposition of lipids
(fatty streaks) already occur in childhood or adolescence. Definite
atherosclerotic plaques in the carotid arteries usually do not manifest
themselves before menopause in women or age 40 in men. Obviously, cumulative
(long-term) and excessive exposure of the vessel wall to risk factors is required
to overcome highly effective defense mechanisms which have not yet been fully
investigated. Initiation and early progression of atherosclerosis rely on
conventional vascular risk factors such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, smoking,
severe alcohol consumption and chronic infections. Plaque extension is
effectively compensated by a focal widening of the vessel, thereby preventing the
development of lumen obstruction (vascular remodeling). For stenosis to emerge
conventional plaques must convert to complicated plaques characterized by plaque 
rupture and consecutive atherothrombosis. This process usually starts with small-
to medium-sized plaques. Potential determinants of plaque rupture are the
composition of the lesion (large lipid-rich core), damage of the fibrous cap
(destabilization by chronic inflammation) and hemodynamic stress. According to
pathological observations, fissuring of atherosclerotic lesions is a frequent
event, while the formation of overlying large thrombi (with progression of
stenosis or vessel occlusion) is definitely rare. This conjecture emphasizes the 
significance of local and systemic thrombus-promoting factors. Actually, the risk
profile of advanced atherogenesis in the Bruneck Study was primarily composed of 
markers of enhanced prothrombotic capacity, attenuated fibrinolysis and clinical 
conditions known to interfere with coagulation. Almost all subjects with > or =3 
procoagulant risk conditions developed carotid stenosis or showed progression of 
preexisting stenosis during a 5-year period. Increasing insights into the complex
biology of arterial atheroma and awareness of the etiologic peculiarities of
advanced complicated plaques may serve as a basis for identifying high-risk
subjects and for novel vascular prevention strategies with focus on plaque
stabilization and antithrombotic/anticoagulant measures.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11096178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Am J Cardiol. 2000 Oct 19;86(8B):3J-8J; discussion 8J-9J.

Coronary artery injury and the biology of atherosclerosis: inflammation,
thrombosis, and stabilization.

Libby P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Conventional concepts of the pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes are
changing. High-risk lesions are not necessarily the angiographically "tight"
stenoses. Rather, unstable vulnerable lesions have large lipid cores and thin
fibrous caps. Plaque instability relates closely to the development of
inflammation within the intima. Acute coronary syndromes usually result from
rupture of a vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque mechanistically linked to the
inflammatory process. Stabilization of lesions, rather than percutaneous or
surgical procedures, provides a new therapeutic target. Lipid lowering may
stabilize lesions by mitigating the inflammatory response.

PMID: 11081443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Am J Cardiol. 2000 Mar 9;85(5A):13B-20B.

Post-hospitalization management of high-risk coronary patients.

Muhlestin JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Utah, LDS Hospital, Salt Lake City
84143, USA.

The major cause of morbidity and mortality associated with coronary
atherosclerosis is plaque rupture, which often results in one of the acute
coronary syndromes: unstable angina, non-Q-wave myocardial infarction (MI), or
Q-wave MI. Plaque rupture may be attributable to the thickness of the overlying
fibrous cap; thinner plaques are more likely to rupture. It appears that the
presence of inflammation is a significant contributor to rupture. Acute-phase
treatments are highly efficacious, but secondary prevention, often overlooked,
also is life-saving. Diet, exercise, and medications are the interventions
available for secondary prevention. Four classes of medications--aspirin, beta
blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors
(statins)--are also used in this setting with a high degree of success in
reducing mortality and morbidity. Numerous studies have demonstrated a 30-50%
reduction in mortality with aspirin. The reduction in mortality achieved with
beta blockers in studies of patients after myocardial infarction are 15-50%. ACE 
inhibitors significantly reduce the risk of death from myocardial infarction in
patients with coronary artery disease with or without myocardial infarction.
Statins are beneficial even in patients whose cholesterol level is low to normal.
Patients who were discharged on a statin showed a 50% reduction in mortality over
those who did not receive statin therapy independent of lipid level. C-reactive
protein, a marker of inflammation, is predictive of mortality, as are age and
ejection fraction. Statins may be anti-inflammatory in addition to their
lipid-lowering effect. Secondary-prevention strategies such as case management,
electronic discharge prompting, better communication between referring physicians
and cardiologists, and patient education may also have positive effects on
after-discharge morbidity and mortality.

PMID: 11076126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


590. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2000 Oct;15(1):13-26.

Inflammation and infection in acute coronary syndrome.

Albert NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kaufman Center for Heart Failure, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195,
USA. albertn@ccf.org

Basic science research has revealed that monocytes and macrophages are important 
factors in atherogenesis. Immune system activation occurs at all stages of plaque
formation, from the fatty streak to an advanced, complicated lesion. The
inflammatory response not only stimulates changes in coronary artery endothelial 
cells causing endothelial injury and dysfunction, but also plays a role in plaque
instability and rupture. New perspectives of atherosclerosis and acute coronary
syndromes will be discussed in relation to inflammation. In addition, discussion 
will focus on bacterial and viral infectious microorganisms as a potential factor
that may induce and promote inflammation and lead to acute coronary events.
Clinical studies in humans have provided insight relating inflammation and
infectious agents to atherosclerosis and plaque vulnerability. Other studies
focus on specific interventions that may aid in diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 11061218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


591. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2000 Feb;74(2):149-51.

Great amount of C.pneumoniae in ruptured plaque vessel segments at autopsy. A
comparative study with stable plaques.

Higuchi Md(1), Castelli JB, Aiello VD, Palomino S, Reis MM, Sambiase NV, Fukasawa
S, Bezerra HG, Ramires JA.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, Medical School, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. anplourdes@incor.usp.br

A possible relationship between C.pneumoniae (CP) infection, atherosclerosis and 
acute myocardial infarction is a debated matter. Now we performed the search of
CP in histological segments of fatal ruptured plaques and of stable plaques by
histochemistry (Macchiavello stain), immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization techniques. Electron microscopy and confocal laser microscopy
techniques were used in two additional cases. The semi-quantification of CP +
cells (0-4+) and quantification of lymphocytes demonstrated greater amount of CP 
+ cells and more inflammation in the adventitia of vulnerable plaque vessel
segments than of stable ones, larger amount of CP + cells in adventitia than in
the plaque and high frequency of CP + cells in all groups studied. This
preliminary study strongly suggests a direct pathogenetic involvement of
adventitial CP in the rupture of the atheromatous plaque, development of acute
myocardial infarction and also in the development of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 10904288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Mol Med Today. 2000 Aug;6(8):304-8.

The molecular role of mast cells in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.

Kelley JL(1), Chi DS, Abou-Auda W, Smith JK, Krishnaswamy G.

Author information: 
(1)East Tennessee State University, Department of Medicine, P.O. Box 70622,
Johnson City, TN 37614, USA.

Human atherosclerosis has many characteristics of an inflammatory disorder.
Recent data suggest that mast cells might be important in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerotic disease. By secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, mast cells
can assist in the recruitment of monocytes and lymphocytes into vascular tissue, 
thereby propagating the inflammatory response. Mast cell enzymes might activate
pro-metalloproteinases, thereby destabilizing atheromatous plaques. Mast cells
can facilitate foam cell formation by promoting cholesterol accumulation.
However, mast cell tryptase could slow thrombus formation at sites of plaque
rupture by interfering with coagulation. Therefore, mast cells can modulate
coronary artery disease by both facilitatory and inhibitory pathways.

PMID: 10904247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Atherosclerosis. 1999 Sep 9;147 Suppl 1:S3-10.

Mechanisms modifying atherosclerotic disease - from lipids to vascular biology.

Weissberg P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Recent clinical trials of three statins, pravastain, simvastatin and lovastatin, 
have demonstrated a major reduction in acute coronary events typically
precipitated by plaque rupture. However, angiographic studies with several
statins have shown that they do not appear to greatly affect the size of
pre-existing plaques. These findings strongly suggest that the demonstrated
protective effect of these statins is mediated through changes in plaque
composition rather than size, highlighting the greater importance of composition 
than size in determining clinical outcome. Atherosclerotic plaques are composed
of a thrombogenic lipid-rich core protected by a fibrous cap comprising smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) and inflammatory cells, predominantly macrophages. SMCs are
the only cell type in the atherosclerotic plaque capable of synthesizing a strong
fibrous cap. Their survival is therefore crucial to plaque stability. In
contrast, inflammatory cells such as macrophages increase the risk of plaque
rupture by a number of mechanisms. Thus, in atherosclerosis, there is a balance
between the influence of inflammatory cells tending towards plaque instability
and the reparative influence of SMCs tending to plaque stability. The implication
of the successful outcome studies is that the statins tested may beneficially
influence this balance either by decreasing inflammation or promoting repair or
both. However, because statins do not have a uniform effect on all the biological
processes contributing to plaque rupture and subsequent thrombosis, the potential
benefit from treating with a statin cannot necessarily be presumed or predicted
from its lipid lowering potency alone. Therefore prescription of statins to
prevent cardiovascular events should be based on the evidence of outcome trials.

PMID: 10575056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Atherosclerosis. 1999 Dec;147(2):253-61.

Atorvastatin reduces NF-kappaB activation and chemokine expression in vascular
smooth muscle cells and mononuclear cells.

Ortego M(1), Bustos C, Hernández-Presa MA, Tuñón J, Díaz C, Hernández G, Egido J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Autonoma University, Avda Reyes
Católicos 2, 28040, Madrid, Spain.

Cardiovascular mortality, mainly due to the rupture of unstable atherosclerotic
plaques, is reduced by 3-hydroxy-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase
inhibitors. Inflammatory cells, attracted to the vascular lesion by chemokines,
have been implicated in the process of the plaque rupture. In cultured vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMC) and U937 mononuclear cells we have studied the effect 
of Atorvastatin (Atv) on nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity, an inducer
of the mRNA expression of chemokines such as interferon-inducible protein 10
(IP-10) and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1). Angiotensin II (Ang II)
and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) increased NF-kappaB activity in VSMC 
(2 and 5-fold, respectively). Preincubation of cells with 10(-7) mol/l Atv
diminished this activation (44 and 53%). The inhibition was reversed by
mevalonate, farnesylpyrophosphate (FPP) and geranylgeranylpyrophosphate (GGPP),
but not by other isoprenoids. Coinciding with the NF-kappaB activation in VSMC,
there was a diminution of cytoplasmic IkappaB levels that was recovered by
pretreatment with Atv. Ang II and TNF-alpha induced the expression of IP-10 (1.5 
and 3.4-fold) and MCP-1 (2.4 and 4-fold) in VSMC. Atv reduced this overexpression
around 38 and 35% (IP-10), and 54 and 39% (MCP-1), respectively. Our results
strongly suggest that Atv, through the inhibition of NF-kappaB activity and
chemokine gene expression, could reduce the inflammation within the
atherosclerotic lesion and play a role in the stabilization of the lesion.

PMID: 10559511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Am Heart J. 1999 Aug;138(2 Pt 2):S55-60.

From plaque biology to clinical setting.

Arbustini E(1), Morbini P, Bello BD, Prati F, Specchia G.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Cardiology, IRCCS Policlinico, San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

Comment in
    Am Heart J. 2000 May;139(5):925-6.

Coronary atherosclerosis may cause acute and chronic ischemic syndromes; the
former are caused by "acute plaque events," mostly thrombosis complicating
vulnerable ruptured plaques, namely severe lesions with large core, thin cap, and
weak shoulder infiltrated by activated inflammatory cells. Plaque rupture may
also occur in nonischemic settings and is not obligatorily complicated by
thrombosis. Furthermore, plaque rupture is not the only thrombus substrate in
acute ischemic syndromes: Superficial erosion of fibrous plaques is found in 44% 
of acute thrombi in sudden coronary deaths and in 25% of those in acute
myocardial infarctions. Coronary thrombosis appears to be triggered by
superficial intimal inflammation in plaque ulceration and by neointimal
hyperplasia in plaque erosion. "Endogenous" and, recently, exogenous factors,
particularly infective intracellular organisms, have been proposed as major
contributors to plaque inflammation, activation, and vulnerability. Possible
exogenous triggers are DNA and RNA viruses and intracellular bacteria such as
Chlamydia pneumoniae, which has been identified with microbiological,
ultrastructural, immunohistochemical, and molecular tools in a consistent
proportion of human plaque samples. Chlamydia increases local thrombogenicity and
is associated with an atherogenic lipid profile. Systemic indexes of
inflammation, such as PCR, SAA, and fibrinogen, are also increased in acute
syndromes and common infectious diseases with high morbidity and minimal clinical
impact are good candidates; Helicobacter pylori is a major one. Infectious agents
could link local and systemic inflammation: White cells infected in its target
tissue could circulate into the flow and be captured, on a specific local
trigger, into vessel walls thus stimulating local inflammation.

PMID: 10426860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


596. Semin Interv Cardiol. 1999 Mar;4(1):11-6.

What an interventional cardiologist should know about the pathophysiology of
acute myocardial infarction.

Kristensen SD(1), Andersen HR, Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology B, Skejby Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Basic knowledge of the sequence of cellular events that change the relative
benign disease coronary atherosclerosis into a life-threatening acute coronary
syndrome is of great importance for the interventional cardiologist in order to
understand and choose the correct pharmacological and interventional management
in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Plaque disruption, or fissuring,
with superimposed thrombosis frequently complicates the course of coronary
atherosclerosis. Small ruptures often remain clinically silent, whereas more
extensive plaque rupture may lead to the development of unstable angina, acute
myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. The risk of plaque disruption
depends more on plaque composition than on plaque size and stenosis severity.
Major determinants of a plaque's vulnerability to rupture are: the size and
consistency of the lipid-rich atheromatous core, the thickness of the fibrous cap
covering the core, and inflammation and repair within the cap. The elevation of
fibrinogen and C-reactive protein in patients with unstable angina may be markers
of ongoing plaque inflammation. Both plaque vulnerability and rupture triggers
are important for plaque disruption. The resultant thrombotic response, which is 
important for the clinical presentation and outcome, is in part determined by the
reactivity of the circulating platelets and the balance between the fibrinolytic 
and coagulation systems. New ways of identification and treatment of the
dangerous vulnerable plaques responsible for infarction and death and
optimization of anti-thrombotic treatment are highly warranted in order to
prevent and treat life-threatening coronary thrombosis.

PMID: 10406063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Stroke. 1999 Jul;30(7):1319-25.

Recently occluded intracranial and extracranial carotid arteries. Relevance of
the unstable atherosclerotic plaque.

Lammie GA(1), Sandercock PA, Dennis MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, Scotland.
al@skull.dcn.ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: It is now widely accepted that thrombotic coronary artery
occlusion usually follows rupture of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque. The
significance of such instability in arteries supplying the brain is less well
appreciated. We therefore describe the clinical and pathological features of
recent, symptomatic internal carotid artery occlusion to examine the pathogenetic
role of plaque instability at both extracranial and intracranial sites.
METHODS: Cases were selected from a consecutive series of 188 adult
neuropathology autopsies. In 90 of these, the principal neuropathological
abnormality was cerebral infarction, in 14 cases due to recent occlusion of 1 or 
more segments of the internal carotid artery. In each case, a full systemic,
cardiovascular, and neuropathological autopsy was performed. Plaque instability
was assessed by the presence or absence of a large, necrotic, lipid core; a thin,
fibrous cap; and superficial inflammation.
RESULTS: Of the 14 cases, 3 showed extracranial (carotid sinus), 7 intracranial, 
and 4 both extracranial and intracranial carotid artery occlusion. In 6 of the 7 
occluded carotid sinuses, thrombus overlay an ulcerated, unstable,
atherosclerotic plaque. In 1 extracranial and all 11 intracranial occlusions,
there was either no atheroma or a mildly stenotic, stable, fibrous plaque, and in
these cases, the cause of occlusion was embolism (8 cases), giant-cell arteritis 
(1 case), and unknown (3 cases).
CONCLUSIONS: Coronary-type rupture of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque is the
usual cause of fatal occlusion of the carotid sinus, but other causes usually
underlie intracranial carotid occlusion. The nature and consequences of
intracranial atherosclerosis require further study.

PMID: 10390302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl. 1999;230:3-11.

Plaque pathology and coronary thrombosis in the pathogenesis of acute coronary
syndromes.

Zhou J(1), Chew M, Ravn HB, Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Clinical Research, Aarhus University Hospital (SKS),
Denmark.

Coronary atherosclerosis is by far the most frequent cause of ischemic heart
disease and plaque disruption with superimposed thrombosis is the main cause of
the acute coronary syndromes of unstable angina, myocardial infarction, and
sudden coronary death. Therefore, for event-free survival, the vital question is 
not why atherosclerosis develops but rather why, after years of indolent growth, 
it suddenly becomes complicated by life-threatening thrombosis. Therefore, we
have to focus on plaque composition and vulnerability to rupture and plaque
thrombogenicity rather than on plaque size and stenosis severity. The risk for
plaque disruption depends more on plaque vulnerability (plaque type) than on
degree of stenosis (plaque size). Lipid-rich and soft plaques are more vulnerable
and prone to rupture than collagen-rich and hard plaques. They are also highly
thrombogenic after disruption because of high content of tissue factor. There
seems to be three major determinants of a plaque's vulnerability to rupture: 1)
the size and consistency of the lipid-rich atheromatous core, 2) the thickness of
the fibrous cap covering the core, and 3) ongoing inflammation and repair
processes within the fibrous cap. Lipid accumulation, cap thinning, lack of
smooth muscle cells (smc), and macrophage-related inflammation destabilize
plaques, making them vulnerable to rupture. In contrast, smc-related healing and 
repair processes stabilize plaques, protecting them against disruption. Plaque
size or stenosis severity tell nothing about a plaque's vulnerability. Many
vulnerable plaques are invisible angiographically due to their small size and
compensatory vascular remodeling.

PMID: 10389196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


599. Cardiol Clin. 1999 May;17(2):271-81.

Plaque disruption and thrombosis. Potential role of inflammation and infection.

Shah PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Burn and Allen Research Institute, Los
Angeles, California, USA. Shahp@cshs.org

Considerable data from in vitro and in vivo studies of vascular biology, together
with indirect evidence from clinical trials of lipid-lowering or modifying and
lifestyle or risk factor modifying interventions, provide strong support for the 
concept that disruption of atherosclerotic plaque and subsequent thrombosis is a 
key precipitant of potentially lethal, acute coronary syndromes. Certain
characteristics of plaques, including the size and composition of the lipid core,
the structure and composition of the fibrous cap, and the presence of a local
inflammatory process, predispose the plaque to disruption. Stresses resulting
from biomechanical and hemodynamic forces acting on plaques may then trigger
disruption, releasing the thrombogenic contents of the lipid core. Alterations in
endothelial function may also contribute to vulnerability of plaque rupture and
thrombosis. Therefore, interventions aimed at decreasing plaque vulnerability to 
disruption--all based on the concept of plaque stabilization--may reduce the risk
of acute coronary syndromes. Although not yet rigorously validated in humans,
plaque stabilization may prove to be an important clinical strategy for
preventing the lethal consequences of coronary atherosclerosis.

PMID: 10384826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Clin Exp Hypertens. 1999 Apr;21(3):181-98.

Homocyst(e)ine and heart disease: pathophysiology of extracellular matrix.

Tyagi SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics and Center of Excellence in
Cardiovascular & Renal Research, The University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson 39216-4505, USA.

Occlusive coronary artery disease is an important factor of cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality. The rupture of the thin fibrous cap of the atheroma may 
be one of the causes of acute coronary syndrome, however, the mechanism of
formation of fibrous plaque are poorly understood. Elevation of plasma
homocysteine, hyperhomocystinemia, H(e), has emerged as an independent risk
factor for hypertension and fibrotic heart disease. The extracellular matrix
(ECM) components, particularly fibrillar collagen, are elevated in the
atherosclerotic lesions and are the essential integral element in holding the
oxidized low density lipoproteins (LDL), homocystine, macrophage and foam cells
in milieu, constituting the primary atherosclerotic and secondary restenotic
lesions. In vivo and in vitro physiological, morphological, cellular, biochemical
and molecular experiments have suggested the role of tissue homocystine in
cardiovascular fibrosis and adverse ECM remodeling following H(e). The tissue
homocystine induces cardiovascular fibrosis and may lead to heart failure via the
redox-receptor pathway. The underlying cause and mechanism of cardiovascular
fibrosis associated with arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis, hypertension and
coronary heart disease, involve changes in the levels of tissue redox state.

PMID: 10225475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1999 Feb 6;143(6):291-5.

[Atherosclerosis as an infectious disease].

[Article in Dutch]

Visseren FL(1), Erkelens DW.

Author information: 
(1)Academisch Ziekenhuis, afd. Inwendige Geneeskunde, Utrecht.

According to several published studies micro-organisms may be involved in
atherogenesis. An association is described between cytomegalovirus or Chlamydia
pneumoniae and an increased risk of vascular events. The micro-organisms are able
to infect endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in vivo and in vitro, evoking
to pathophysiological reactions of these cells which may lead to atherosclerosis,
arterial thrombosis and plaque rupture. In two small secondary prevention trials,
macrolide treatment proved successful in preventing second myocardial
infarctions. At this moment, however, it is too early for treatment with
antimicrobial agents to prevent vascular diseases in daily clinical practice.

PMID: 10221083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Herz. 1999 Feb;24(1):62-71.

[Endothelial dysfunction--assessment of current status and approaches to
therapy].

[Article in German]

Simon BC(1), Noll B, Maisch B.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin-Kardiologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg.
bcsimon@mailer.uni-marburg.de

The vascular endothelium is the inner lining of all blood vessels and serves as
an important autocrine and paracrine organ, that regulates vascular wall
functions. Because of its strategic location between the circulating blood and
the vascular wall, the endothelium interacts with cellular and neurohumoral
mediators, thus controlling vascular contractile state and cellular composition. 
The vascular endothelium maintains vascular homeostasis by modulating blood
vessel tone, by regulating local cellular growth and extracellular matrix
deposition and by controlling hemostatic as well as inflammatory responses. One
of the best characterized and most important substances released from the
endothelium is nitric oxide (NO). NO is a soluble gas which is continuously
synthesized from the amino acid L-arginine in endothelial cells by the
constitutively expressed nitric oxide synthase. The most important stimuli
represent physical factors such as shear stress and pulsatile stretching of the
vessel wall as well as circulating and locally released vasoactive substances.
The endothelium can be seen as a biosensor, reacting to a large variety of
stimuli and therefore maintaining adequate NO release. A large number of risk
factors for atherosclerosis including hypercholesterolemia, systemic
hypertension, smoking and diabetes have been associated with impaired endothelial
NO-mediated vasodilation. "Endothelial dysfunction" is an early marker of
atherosclerosis and may be closely related to the disease process. In acute
coronary syndromes dysfunctional endothelium may trigger the devastating event of
plaque rupture by promoting adhesion of leukocytes, vasoconstriction, activation 
of platelets and thrombos formation. Atherosclerotic blood vessels are further
characterized by activation through zytokines and expression of cellular adhesion
molecules such as vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule-1
(E-Selectin). After adhesion to the endothelium mononuclear cells migrate to the 
subendothelial space to take up oxidized LDL, thus transforming into foam cells, 
a hall mark of early atherosclerotic lesions. A number of conditions including
infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae may cause continuous activation of the
endothelium and inflammation of the vessel wall. Continuous endothelial
dysfunction and activation, caused by risk factors and infection, represent the
basis for atherogenesis and acute coronary syndromes.

PMID: 10093015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


603. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):646-55.

Cyclooxygenase-2 is widely expressed in atherosclerotic lesions affecting native 
and transplanted human coronary arteries and colocalizes with inducible nitric
oxide synthase and nitrotyrosine particularly in macrophages.

Baker CS(1), Hall RJ, Evans TJ, Pomerance A, Maclouf J, Creminon C, Yacoub MH,
Polak JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Histochemistry, Cardiology, and Infectious Diseases, Imperial
College School of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. cbaker@rpms.ac.uk

Inflammation appears to have a major role in the development of atherosclerotic
lesions affecting native and transplanted coronary arteries. The subsequent risk 
of plaque rupture and acute ischemic events correlates with the degree of
inflammation and may be modified by aspirin, an anti-inflammatory cyclooxygenase 
inhibitor. Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
are involved in the inflammatory response via the rapid and exaggerated
production of prostanoids and nitric oxide, both of which may have
proatherosclerotic effects. These effects may be mediated by the formation of
peroxynitrite in the case of nitric oxide and involve "cross talk" between the
two enzyme systems. This study aimed to investigate native and transplant
atherosclerosis for the presence and distribution of Cox-2 and iNOS.
Immunocytochemical studies were performed on atherosclerotic lesions from
patients with native (n=12) and transplant (n=5) coronary disease by using
antibodies to Cox-2, iNOS, and nitrotyrosine (an indicator of peroxynitrite
production). Control tissue was obtained from unused donor hearts and at the time
of autopsy. Cox-2 and iNOS colocalized predominantly in macrophages/foam cells in
both types of atherosclerosis. Cox-2 expression was also detected in medial
smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells, including those of the vasa vasorum.
Nitrotyrosine was found in the same distribution as that of iNOS and was
colocalized with Cox-2 in macrophages. Cox-2 and iNOS are coexpressed in native
and transplant atherosclerosis, possibly allowing for interaction between the
enzymes and suggesting an alternative mechanism for the benefits of aspirin via
inhibition of Cox-2 activity.

PMID: 10073969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Arch Intern Med. 1999 Feb 8;159(3):237-45.

Emerging noninvasive biochemical measures to predict cardiovascular risk.

Pahor M(1), Elam MB, Garrison RJ, Kritchevsky SB, Applegate WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38105,
USA. mpahor@utmem1.utmem.edu

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 1999 Aug 9-23;159(15):1812-3.

New predictors of cardiovascular events are needed to improve the accuracy of
risk stratification. Such predictors should be easily measurable in the
population and potentially modifiable. This review reports on new biomarkers that
are closely linked to the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the progression of the
atherosclerotic plaque leading to rupture and thrombosis that ultimately
precipitate acute clinical events, such as stroke and myocardial infarction.
These risk factors have been associated with subclinical or clinical
cardiovascular disease in large populations and include markers of lipoprotein
and lipid metabolism, vitamin B12 metabolism, fibrinolysis, coagulation,
inflammation, infection, endothelial dysfunction, the angiotensin system, and
oxidative stress. For other key processes of atherosclerosis and cardiac disease,
such as apoptosis or programmed cell death, there are currently no markers that
can be measured noninvasively. Atherosclerosis is a multifactorial condition and 
possibly only a subset of factors are the main determinants of disease in a given
patient. A better definition of the cardiovascular risk profile will help to
better target primary and secondary prevention. Further epidemiological studies
are needed to characterize the actual predictive and clinical value of these new 
emerging cardiovascular biomarkers.

PMID: 9989535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Vasc Med. 1998;3(3):225-9.

The interface of atherosclerosis and thrombosis: basic mechanisms.

Libby P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Occlusive vascular disease most often results from thrombosis superimposed on
atherosclerotic plaque. Disruption of plaque exposes thrombogenic substances
within the plaque to blood and may result in thrombotic occlusion of the affected
vessel. Mural thrombi may be incorporated into plaque, enhancing the evolution of
atherosclerotic lesions. Inflammation plays a key role in the formation and
complication of atherosclerosis. Inflammatory mediators regulate processes that
determine the composition of the plaque's fibrous cap, a structure that separates
blood from the thrombogenic lipid core. Several inflammatory mediators control
the release of metalloproteinases (enzymes that break down cap constituents) from
smooth muscle cells, macrophages and other cells within plaque. Inflammatory
mediators also control the production of connective tissue matrix by cells in the
plaque. Factors involved in coagulation, such as thrombin, can regulate
non-thrombotic functions of vascular wall cells such as smooth muscle
proliferation or cytokine release. The many mechanisms involved in arterial
occlusive disease present numerous points at which intervention with
pharmacologic agents may prove effective in lowering the risk of acute arterial
thrombotic complications.

PMID: 9892515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


606. Am J Pathol. 1998 Dec;153(6):1825-37.

ACE inhibitor quinapril reduces the arterial expression of NF-kappaB-dependent
proinflammatory factors but not of collagen I in a rabbit model of
atherosclerosis.

Hernández-Presa MA(1), Bustos C, Ortego M, Tuñón J, Ortega L, Egido J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Autonoma University, Madrid,
Spain.

Increasing evidence supports an association between inflammation and plaque
rupture. Macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells are a source of cytokines
and growth factors, which contribute to ongoing inflammation during
atherogenesis. In a rabbit model of atherosclerosis, we evaluated the effect of
the ACE inhibitor quinapril on different parameters implicated in the
pathogenesis of the plaque, such as the presence of chemokines (interleukin-8,
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1), collagen I, and vascular smooth muscle cell 
proliferation (PDGF-B). Since nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) has been
implicated in the control of chemokine transcription and cell proliferation, we
also investigated its activation and localization in the lesion. Quinapril
administration for 28 days caused a down-regulation in arterial expression of
interleukin-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mRNA and protein). However,
collagen I expression (mRNA and protein) was not modified. PDGF-B expression was 
reduced in both the intima and the media. Active NF-kappaB, found in both
macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells, was also reduced by quinapril.
Nevertheless, no significant changes were noted in the mild neointima formation, 
although a certain trend toward normalization was found in the quinapril-treated 
group. In conclusion, our results show that quinapril treatment attenuates
several parameters associated with inflammation within the atherosclerotic
lesions that are controlled by NF-kappaB, although it has no effect on collagen I
expression. Both effects could contribute to the stabilization of the
atherosclerotic plaque.

PMCID: PMC1866315
PMID: 9846973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Curr Opin Lipidol. 1998 Oct;9(5):413-23.

Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases and metalloproteinases in
atherosclerosis.

George SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK. s.j.george@bristol.ac.uk

The ability of the metalloproteinases to degrade extracellular matrix proteins is
essential for the matrix remodelling that occurs during infiltration of
inflammatory cells, intimal thickening, angiogenesis and plaque rupture which are
a result of atherosclerosis. Increased metalloproteinase activity therefore
requires stimulation of metalloproteinase expression by cytokines and growth
factors, activation of metalloproteinases, and downregulation of tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases. In addition, metalloproteinases may influence
atherosclerosis by processing of proteins involved in inflammation and cell
growth and death and the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases may also play a 
less inhibitory role by influencing cell growth and apoptosis.

PMID: 9812195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


608. Drugs. 1998;56 Suppl 1:9-13; discussion 33.

New insights into plaque stabilisation by lipid lowering.

Libby P(1), Aikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Thrombosis on the substrate of a disrupted plaque causes most acute coronary
events. The physical integrity of the plaque thus governs the most important
clinical manifestations of atherosclerosis. Of particular importance is the
extracellular matrix of the fibrous capsule overlying the thrombogenic core of
the atheroma. Stable atheroma generally have thick fibrous caps, and smaller
lipid cores than lesions that have ruptured. Accumulating evidence supports a key
role for inflammation as another critical determinant of the stability of human
atherosclerotic plaques. Plaques that rupture usually have more abundant
leucocytic infiltrates than those considered stable. Inflammatory mediators such 
as cytokines can influence several biological processes that regulate the
stability of the plaque's fibrous cap, and thus its resistance to rupture. For
example, interferon-gamma produced by activated T lymphocytes within atheroma
inhibits the production of interstitial forms of collagen by human vascular
smooth muscle cells. Inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1, tumour
necrosis factor (TNF) and CD-40 ligand (a cell surface homologue of TNFalpha) can
also elicit the expression by macrophages and smooth muscle cells of proteolytic 
enzymes that can weaken the extracellular matrix. We have hypothesised that lipid
lowering reduces stimuli for the inflammatory response within the complex
atherosclerotic lesion. Recent studies in rabbits with experimentally produced
atherosclerosis have indeed shown that lipid lowering can (i) reduce macrophage
numbers, (ii) decrease expression of the collagenolytic enzyme MMP-1, and (iii)
reinforce the plaque's fibrous skeleton by increasing the content of interstitial
collagen. By reducing local inflammation, lipid lowering can thus stabilise the
plaque's fibrous cap, rendering the atheroma less prone to rupture and to
precipitate thrombotic complications. These observations provide a mechanistic
basis for understanding the marked reduction in acute coronary events and
cerebrovascular accidents observed in patients treated with agents that reduce
plasma lipids.

PMID: 9740536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Clin Chem. 1998 Aug;44(8 Pt 2):1799-808.

Endothelium and acute coronary syndromes.

Liao JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA. jliao@bustoff.bwh.harvard.edu

The vascular endothelium is a dynamic endocrine organ that regulates contractile,
secretory, and mitogenic activities in the vessel wall and hemostatic processes
within the vascular lumen. Risk factors for atherosclerosis such as cigarette
smoking, hypertension, and increased serum lipid concentrations impair
endothelial function and lead to the development of atherosclerotic vessels,
which cause acute coronary syndromes. Atherosclerotic vessels progress from
scattered foam cells to complex lesions with a lipid core and fibrous cap.
Factors that weaken and cause the rupture of the fibrous cap will expose
circulating blood products to the procoagulant materials in the lipid core.
Thrombosis and subsequent remodeling of the unstable plaque may be catastrophic
or clinically silent depending on the degree of vascular occlusion and
availability of collateral blood flow. Evidence is presented that supports the
view that endothelial dysfunction is an early marker of atherosclerosis and an
important contributor to the atherogenic process.

PMID: 9702989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Eur Heart J. 1998 Apr;19 Suppl C:C24-9.

Coronary atherosclerosis: determinants of plaque rupture.

Grønholdt ML(1), Dalager-Pedersen S, Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The most important mechanism responsible for the sudden and unpredictable onset
of acute coronary syndromes is coronary plaque rupture with thrombosis and
vasospasm superimposed. The risk of plaque rupture depends on plaque type
(composition) rather than plaque size (volume); most ruptures occur in plaques
containing a soft, lipid-rich core that is covered by a thin and inflamed cap of 
fibrous tissue. Compared with intact caps, the ruptured ones usually are thinner 
and contain less collagen (responsible for tensile strength), fewer smooth muscle
cells (smc; collagen synthesizing cells), and many more macrophages (collagen
degrading cells). Therefore, major determinants of plaque vulnerability and
rupture are progressive lipid accumulation (core formation) and cap weakening due
to ongoing inflammation with collagen degradation (macrophage-related) and
impaired healing and repair (smc-related). These intrinsic plaque changes
predispose plaques to rupture whereas extrinsic forces imposed on plaques, such
as biomechanical and haemodynamic stresses, may determine the actual time of
rupture by precipitating or 'triggering' it. Luckily, recent research in patients
with coronary artery disease indicates that both plaque vulnerability and rupture
triggers may be modified beneficially by treatment.

PMID: 9597422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Herz. 1998 Mar;23(2):69-77.

[Pathomorphology of coronary atherosclerosis].

[Article in German]

Ihling C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Freiburg. ihling@frk1.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

The "American Heart Association Committee on Vascular Lesions" suggests the
following morphologic classification of atherosclerotic plaques: the
classification is based on large autopsy studies facilitating the assessment of
the natural course of atherosclerotic lesions at precisely defined progression
prone areas of the coronary tree from their clinically silent beginning to the
stage where they produce symptoms. Lesion evolution is divided in 5 phases
reflecting the possible time course of plaque development. Each phase is
characterized by plaques with a distinctive morphology. The classification offers
a framework of typical morphologies which the results of clinical investigations 
may be related to. Looking at the plaque composition, it is readily conceivable
that atherosclerosis shares many characteristics with the general pathology of
chronic inflammation and wound healing. Clinical symptoms e.g. acute coronary
syndromes, arise from inflammation-mediated endothelial erosion and/or plaque
rupture with ensuring coronary thrombosis. Advanced or complicated plaques are
composed of different kinds of constituents in varying proportions. However,
plaques at risk display a large lipid core occupying more than 40% of the
plaque's volume, increased numbers of macrophages, reduced numbers of smooth
muscle cells, an increased expression of tissue factor, and a thin plaque cap.
Functionally, active plaques are characterized by a locally enhanced
vasoreactivity with evidence coming from our own recent investigations that
localised chronic inflammatory processes within the atherosclerotic plaque are
responsible not only for the plaque rupture itself, but also for the
hyperreactivity of these vessels to vasoconstrictor stimuli. In this context
endothelin 1 (ET-1), a very potent vasoconstrictor peptide, may play an important
role. ET-1 was originally reported to be produced by endothelial cells and to act
locally in a paracrine fashion to regulate vascular tone. However, further
studies have clarified that ET-1 is not only produced by endothelial cells but
also by human inflammatory cells suggesting a role for ET-1 in inflammatory
processes. Additionally, ET-1 displays a potent mitogenic activity. We examined
immunohistochemically the presence of ET-1 in coronary plaque tissue obtained by 
directional coronary atherectomy. ET-1 immunoreactivity preferentially localized 
in plaque components indicative of a chronic inflammatory process. In addition,
semiquantitative analysis of ET-1-like immunoreactivity revealed significantly
higher staining grades in active coronary lesions compared with nonactive
lesions. The increased ET-1 content in active coronary lesions may be beneficial 
to the stabilization of the vessel wall after plaque rupture and disadvantageous 
because it may lead to vasospasm and to the progression of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 9592703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Curr Opin Lipidol. 1997 Oct;8(5):320-8.

Thrombosis and atherosclerosis.

Holvoet P(1), Collen D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Belgium.
paul.holvoet@med.kuleuven.ac.be

The initial step in atherosclerosis is the rapid targeting of monocytes to the
sites of inflammation and endothelial injury. Serum levels of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 were found to be increased in ischaemic heart disease
patients and polymorphisms in the E-selectin gene were associated with
accelerated atherosclerosis in young (age < 40 years) patients, further
suggesting a role of inflammation in atherosclerosis. Cholesterol loading in
macrophages was found to induce interleukin-8 expression, suggesting an
association between foam cell formation and beta 2-integrin-dependent adhesion of
leukocytes. Enhanced endothelium-platelet interaction induced by
hypercholesterolaemia is mediated by von Willebrand factor, whereas platelet
adhesion to subendothelial matrix is mediated by fibulin-fibrinogen complexes.
Activated platelets mediate the homing of leukocytes by interaction with the
subendothelial matrix under shear stresses that do not allow neutrophil adhesion.
They may also contribute to the oxidative modification of LDL, provide a source
of lipids for foam cell generation and contribute to smooth muscle cell
proliferation. Oxidized LDL induces tissue factor in macrophages that also
provide sites for fibrin polymerization and decreases the anticoagulant activity 
of endothelium by interfering with thrombomodulin expression and inactivating
tissue factor pathway inhibitor. Intravascular fibrinolysis induced by
tissue-type plasminogen activator or urokinase may contribute to the initiation
of atherosclerosis by inducing P-selectin and platelet activating factor as well 
as to plaque rupture, either directly or indirectly, by activating
metalloproteinases. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 inhibits smooth muscle cell
migration and, in the presence of vitronectin, promotes the clearance of thrombin
by LDL receptor-related protein at sites of endothelial injury.

PMID: 9335957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Am J Cardiol. 1997 Sep 4;80(5A):5E-9E.

Insights into the pathophysiology of unstable coronary artery disease.

Kristensen SD(1), Ravn HB, Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Institute of Experimental Clinical Research,
Skejby Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark.

Coronary atherosclerosis without thrombosis is, in general, a benign disease.
However, plaque disruption, or fissuring, with superimposed thrombosis,
frequently complicates the course of coronary atherosclerosis. Small ruptures
often remain clinically silent, whereas more extensive plaque rupture may cause
the development of unstable angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden death. The 
risk of plaque disruption depends more on plaque type (composition) than on
plaque size and stenosis severity. Major determinants of a plaque's vulnerability
to rupture are: the size and consistency of the lipid-rich atheromatous core; the
thickness of the fibrous cap covering the core; and ongoing inflammation and
repair within the cap. Both plaque vulnerability (intrinsic disease) and rupture 
triggers (extrinsic forces) are important for plaque disruption. The former
predisposes the plaque to rupture whereas the latter may precipitate it. The
resultant thrombotic response, which is important for the clinical presentation
and outcome, is portly determined by the reactivity of the circulating platelets 
and the balance between the fibrinolytic and coagulation systems. New ways of
identification and treatment of the dangerous vulnerable plaques responsible for 
infarction and death, and optimization of antithrombotic treatment, are highly
warranted in order to prevent and treat life-threatening coronary thrombosis.

PMID: 9296462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Circulation. 1997 Jan 7;95(1):5-7.

Atherogenic lipids, vascular dysfunction, and clinical signs of ischemic heart
disease.

Selwyn AP, Kinlay S, Libby P, Ganz P.

Comment on
    Circulation. 1997 Jan 7;95(1):76-82.

LDL is oxidized in vascular endothelial cells to a highly injurious product that 
results in characteristic cell dysfunction(s) in large arteries and resistance
vessels. The characteristic dysfunctions (ie, loss of dilation, constriction,
thrombosis, and inflammation) operate before and throughout the development of
atherosclerosis and particularly during plaque rupture. Although oxidized LDL
appears to induce these cell/vessel wall dysfunctions in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner, Tamai and colleagues have shown that this
interaction can be dynamic in that a reduction in lipids restores
endothelium-dependent vasomotor function almost immediately. The same
intervention (ie, lipid lowering) also appears to stabilize atheroma in the long 
term, improves endothelium-dependent vasomotion over months, and results in a
reduction in clinical signs of risk in coronary heart disease (ie, ischemia and
the need for revascularization). The above leads us to some important but
unanswered questions. Can we rely on clinical measures of arterial vasomotor
dysfunction to represent the other important cell dysfunctions (eg, inflammation,
abnormal growth) while monitoring the response to therapeutic interventions? How 
can we effectively inhibit oxidation of LDL in the arterial wall, and is this
useful in reversing the many cell dysfunctions and clinical sequelae of coronary 
atherosclerosis? What is the time course for restoration of endothelial
dysfunction in the atherosclerotic epicardial coronary arteries in patients with 
effective lipid-lowering therapy? The intracellular responses to oxidized LDL are
so numerous (loss of vasodilation, loss of anticoagulant mechanisms, abnormal
inflammation, and growth) that targeting therapies to specific pathways may prove
difficult. Parallel efforts in basic physiological and clinical research have
resulted in remarkable progress that has improved outcomes in patients with
coronary heart disease. We expect that many of the characteristic cell/vessel
wall dysfunctions that result from adverse interactions with risk factors are
dynamic and can be manipulated in a relatively short time frame. Treatment of
atherogenic lipids with other risk factors must be further refined and may well
become the cornerstone for effective management of angina, unstable syndromes,
and ischemia in addition to the control of important outcomes such as myocardial 
infarction and coronary death.

PMID: 8994406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;29(1):19-30.

Apoptosis during wound healing, fibrocontractive diseases and vascular wall
injury.

Desmoulière A(1), Badid C, Bochaton-Piallat ML, Gabbiani G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-URA 1459, Institut Pasteur de Lyan, France.

Following injury, tissue repair involves inflammation, granulation tissue
formation and scar constitution. Granulation tissue develops from the connective 
tissue surrounding the damaged or missing area and contains mainly small vessels,
inflammatory cells, fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. As the wound closes and
evolves into a scar, there is a striking decrease in cellularity, including
disappearance of typical myofibroblasts. The question arises as to what process
is responsible for granulation tissue cell disappearance. Our results (in
cutaneous wounds) and results of other laboratories (particularly in lungs and
kidney) suggest that apoptosis is the mechanism responsible for the evolution of 
granulation tissue into a scar. During excessive scarring (hypertrophic scar or
fibrosis), it is conceivable that the process of apoptosis cannot take place.
After experimental endothelial injury in an artery, accumulation of smooth muscle
cells participates in the formation of intimal thickening. Apoptotic features
have been observed in cells of intimal thickening and also within human
atherosclerotic plaques. In the case of atherosclerosis, apoptosis could be
detrimental: since smooth muscle cells participate in plaque stability, apoptosis
could lead to weakening and rupture of the plaque. These results underline the
fact that both increased cell survival or excessive cell death can be associated 
with pathological disorders. Specific therapies devised to enhance or decrease
the susceptibility of individual cell types to apoptosis development could modify
the evolution of a variety of human diseases.

PMID: 9076938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


616. J Pathol. 1997 Jan;181(1):93-9.

Association of coronary plaque rupture and atherosclerotic inflammation.

Boyle JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, U.K.

Coronary plaque inflammation may promote plaque rupture and thrombosis. To test
this hypothesis, 351 coronary plaques from 83 patients were formalin-fixed and
stained with haematoxylin and eosin. There were six groups: (1) ruptured plaques;
(2) intact plaques from recently infarcted hearts; (3) plaques from hearts with
severe coronary atherosclerosis without identifiable thrombosis; (4) native
explanted hearts with severe coronary atherosclerosis; (5) cardiac transplant
atherosclerosis; and (6) fatalities unrelated to coronary atherosclerosis.
Selected arteries were immunostained for leukocyte markers and serially sectioned
to identify plaque rupture. There were infiltrates of CD68-positive macrophages
and CD3- and CD8-positive T cells adjacent to all plaque ruptures. Labelling with
HLA-DR and CD30 indicated inflammatory cell activation. Plaque rupture was
strongly statistically associated with the severity and frequency of superficial 
plaque inflammation but not that of deep plaque inflammation. Although
atherosclerotic inflammation has been identified adjacent to rupture, this is its
first comparison with control plaques. These results support the concept that
inflammation in the fibrous cap is particularly associated with plaque rupture.

PMID: 9072009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Am J Pathol. 1996 Aug;149(2):367-80.

Apoptosis is abundant in human atherosclerotic lesions, especially in
inflammatory cells (macrophages and T cells), and may contribute to the
accumulation of gruel and plaque instability.

Björkerud S(1), Björkerud B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Göteborg University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Sweden.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 1997 Jan;150(1):371-3.

Death of intimal tissue may lead to plaque rupture with thrombosis, which is the 
basis of the most severe clinical consequences of atherosclerosis. Little is
known about the mechanisms that promote intimal cell death or its nature. This
work was undertaken to elucidate the extent to which, the cell types in which,
and where programmed cell death, apoptosis, might occur in atherosclerotic
lesions. The material was fibrous or fibro-fatty non-ulcerated lesions from the
human thoracic aorta and coronary arteries. Apoptosis was indicated by the in
situ labeling of internucleosomally degraded DNA with the TUNEL technique, which 
has a preference for apoptosis as compared with cell necrosis and was combined
with the immunohistochemical typing of cells. Apoptosis was corroborated by
morphological criteria on the light and electron microscope levels and by the
presence of an apoptosis-specific protein. It was common in the lesions and
virtually absent in non-atherosclerotic regions. It occurred in smooth muscle
cells subendothelially, in places of the fibrous cap, and in the underlying
media, which may destabilize the plaque and promote rupture. Inflammatory cells, 
ie, macrophages and T cells, appeared abundantly subendothelially, in the fibrous
cap, and in the shoulder regions, and apoptosis was common, maybe reflecting a
means for quenching of the inflammatory reaction. Many macrophages contained
abundant apoptotic material indicative of phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, but
the occurrence of apoptosis, even in some of these cells, and of apoptotic
material extracellularly and the very high numbers of apoptotic cells that were
encountered may indicate insufficient mechanisms for the removal of apoptotic
cells in the atherosclerotic lesion. It is not possible to decide as yet whether 
this is due to overloading with cellular material by inflammation and cell
multiplication, to an increased frequency of apoptosis, to a reduction of the
removal/degradation of apoptotic material by macrophages, or a combination of
these factors.

PMCID: PMC1865303
PMID: 8701977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Curr Opin Cardiol. 1996 Jul;11(4):341-50.

Endothelial dysfunction in coronary heart disease.

McGorisk GM(1), Treasure CB.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic disease characterized by the focal accumulation of
plaque (leukocytes, macrophages, smooth muscle cells, lipids, and extracellular
matrix) in the vessel wall that ultimately leads to obstruction of the lumen
through gradual progression, plaque rupture with intraluminal thrombosis, or
both. The "vulnerable" plaque is smaller in size, richer in lipids, and more
infiltrated with macrophages than the stable fibromuscular lesion. Therefore,
lowering the lipid or macrophage pools stored in the plaque may stabilize the
plaque and reduce the risk for plaque rupture. Indeed, cholesterol-lowering
trials have yielded a significant reduction in acute cardiac events.
Antithrombotic therapy may further prevent acute coronary syndromes by altering
the consequences of plaque rupture. However, we need to address the earlier
stages of atherosclerosis, namely, endothelial dysfunction. Current hypotheses
concerning its pathogenesis focus on vascular endothelial injury, the oxidation
of low-density lipoprotein and its effects on the endothelium, which set off a
cascade or responses involving the complex interaction of growth factors and
cytokines leading to increased oxidative stress, increased free radical
formation, destruction of nitric oxide, endothelial dysfunction, increased
platelet aggregation, thrombosis, inflammation, plaque formation, proteolysis,
plaque fissure, and rupture.

PMID: 8879944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Atherosclerosis. 1995 Dec;118 Suppl:S141-9.

Vulnerable and dangerous coronary plaques.

Schroeder AP(1), Falk E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Skejby University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark.

The clinical presentation and prognosis of coronary atherosclerosis depend more
on plaque type than on plaque size. Stable plaques may narrow the arterial lumen 
and cause stable angina pectoris but are, otherwise, relatively harmless. In
contrast, vulnerable plaques may rupture and thrombose, which is a potentially
life-threatening event, being responsible for the development of the acute
coronary syndromes of unstable angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden death.
Gradual lipid accumulation and ongoing inflammation may destabilize a plaque,
increasing the risk of sudden plaque disruption and thrombosis. External factors 
such as mechanical and hemodynamic stresses may be important in precipitating, or
'triggering', disruption of vulnerable plaques. It is, however, the ensuing
thrombotic response that makes plaque disruption dangerous. The thrombotic
response is dynamic with simultaneously ongoing thrombosis and thrombolysis,
frequently causing intermittent flow obstruction leading to an unstable coronary 
syndrome. The challenge of today is to stabilize the vulnerable plaques, to
prevent new formation of vulnerable plaques, and to prevent thrombosis on intact 
and disrupted plaques.

PMID: 8821473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Circulation. 1995 May 1;91(9):2488-96.

Atherosclerosis: basic mechanisms. Oxidation, inflammation, and genetics.

Berliner JA(1), Navab M, Fogelman AM, Frank JS, Demer LL, Edwards PA, Watson AD, 
Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Unit, University of California School of Medicine,
Los Angeles 90024-1736, USA.

The clinical events resulting from atherosclerosis are directly related to the
oxidation of lipids in LDLs that become trapped in the extracellular matrix of
the subendothelial space. These oxidized lipids activate an NF kappa B-like
transcription factor and induce the expression of genes containing NF kappa B
binding sites. The protein products of these genes initiate an inflammatory
response that initially leads to the development of the fatty streak. The
progression of the lesion is associated with the activation of genes that induce 
arterial calcification, which changes the mechanical characteristics of the
artery wall and predisposes to plaque rupture at sites of monocytic infiltration.
Plaque rupture exposes the flowing blood to tissue factor in the lesion, and this
induces thrombosis, which is the proximate cause of the clinical event. There
appear to be potent genetically determined systems for preventing lipid
oxidation, inactivating biologically important oxidized lipids, and/or modulating
the inflammatory response to oxidized lipids that may explain the differing
susceptibility of individuals and populations to the development of
atherosclerosis. Enzymes associated with HDL may play an important role in
protecting against lipid oxidation in the artery wall and may account in part for
the inverse relation between HDL and risk for atherosclerotic clinical events.

PMID: 7729036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


621. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 1995;2(3):239-243.

Plasma Markers of Procoagulant Activity Among Individuals with Coronary Artery
Disease.

Rho R(1), Tracy RP, Bovill EG, Ball SP, Becker RC.

Author information: 
(1)Thrombosis Research Center, Clinical Trials Section, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA.

Background: There is compelling evidence that coronary atherosclerosis represents
a chronic active process characterized by inflammation, impaired fibrinolysis,
intermittent plaque rupture, and luminal thrombosis. Identifying readily
measurable plasma markers of procoagulant activity may have an important role in 
both tracking and understanding the natural history, as well as in defining the
ideal treatment, of patients with coronary artery disease. Methods/Results: A
total of 30 men and women with suspected coronary artery disease who underwent
outpatient cardiac catheterization were sampled for evidence of thrombin
generation and fibrin formation in plasma. Compared with healthy controls,
patients had significantly increased concentrations of fibrinopeptide A (18.8 +/-
10.8 ng/ml vs. 2.5 +/- 2.3, p < 0.001), thrombin-antithrombin complexes (8.13 +/-
4.56 ng/ml vs. 3.4 +/- 3.0, p < 0.001), and prothrombin activation fragment 1.2
(0.15 +/- 0.09 ng/ml vs. 0.12 +/- 0.19, p = 0.01). There was a statistically
insignificant trend toward increased thrombin-antithrombin complex concentrations
in patients with hypercholesterolemia (p = 0.10). Patients with angiographically 
defined coronary artery disease involving two or more vessels were found to have 
heightened thrombin generation and fibrin formation compared with those with
single vessel disease. Conclusions: Patients with atherosclerotic coronary artery
disease exhibit evidence of heightened procoagulant activity, including thrombin 
generation and fibrin formation. This observation, coupled with those derived
from other recent studies, support the hypothesis that coronary atherosclerosis
represents a chronic active process typified by vessel wall inflammation and
recurrent thrombosis. Future efforts in disease prevention and treatment must
consider these fundamental pathobiologic properties.

PMID: 10608030  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


622. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1995;25 Suppl 2:S9-12.

Cytokines regulate vascular functions related to stability of the atherosclerotic
plaque.

Libby P(1), Sukhova G, Lee RT, Galis ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The cytokines are multipotent mediators of inflammation and immunity that can
affect key functions of vascular wall cells. Growing evidence suggests that
cytokines participate as autocrine or paracrine mediators in atherogenesis, as
cells in lesions can both produce and respond to these mediators. The functions
of vascular wall cells regulated by cytokines may influence lesion initiation,
progression, or complication. For example, cytokines can regulate the expression 
of adhesion molecules crucial to the recruitment of leukocytes to lesions,
including vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). Cytokines such as
interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) can regulate the
production of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), a potential signal for 
directed migration of monocytes into the intima. Cytokines can also regulate
genes that encode other growth factors and cytokines themselves. TNF-alpha can
induce IL-1 mRNA in human endothelial (EC) and smooth-muscle cells (SMC). IL-1
and TNF-alpha can augment the production by vascular cells of macrophage-colony
stimulating factor (M-CSF), which may promote growth and activation of
mononuclear phagocytes. Cytokines can exert both pro-and antiatherogenic actions.
Activated T cells in human atheroma may secrete the lymphokine IFN-gamma, an
inhibitor of SMC proliferation. Cytokines influence vasomotor tone in arteries,
e.g., by inducing a form of nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that synthesizes
the vasodilatory nitric oxide radical. The cytokines also modulate endothelial
functions that govern the formation and stability of blood thrombi. Finally, in
the late stages of the disease, matrix metalloproteinases derived from
macrophages or smooth-muscle cells themselves may contribute to weakening of the 
fibrous cap in the vulnerable shoulder area, promoting plaque rupture and
occlusive thrombosis, culminating in the dramatic clinical manifestations of
atherosclerosis, including myocardial infarction and stroke. Thus, cytokines can 
influence multiple aspects of atherogenesis and provide new and interesting
targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 8699871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Eur Heart J. 1993 Dec;14 Suppl K:94-7.

Inflammation in atheroma: implications for plaque rupture and platelet-collagen
interaction.

Lassila R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wihuri Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory reaction to accumulated extracellular lipid in
the arterial intima. Evidence from pathological studies indicate that there is
constant deposition and lysis of fibrin within the atherosclerotic arterial wall.
In patients with stable peripheral atherosclerosis, the functional severity of
the disease is associated with circulating fibrinogen and degradation of
cross-linked fibrin reflecting procoagulant activity in the blood-vessel wall
interface, or in the wall itself. In atheromas the fibrinolytic activity is
connected to macrophages, which can assemble in the plasminogen-plasmin system
and generate plasmin-mediated pericellular proteolysis in tissues with
inflammation. Plasmin capable of activating collagenase may therefore be a
candidate for plaque rupture. The nature of the exposed vascular tissue, the
inflammatory state, tissue-factor dependent thrombin generation and the degree of
matrix degradation regulate platelet reactivity. Little is yet known about
platelet adhesive functions in proteolyzed collagens that are the underlying
substrate where platelets deposit during plaque rupture, the triggering event for
thrombosis. Research in these areas is likely to improve the understanding of the
thrombogenicity of atheromas when the tissue is suddenly exposed to blood.

PMID: 8131797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

